 Alert:       For more information on the cybersecurity incident, please visit the cybersecurity incident page.                                                                   MORE INFO 




                                                                                                                             Français         Questions/Complaints       Careers          




  About CIRO       ODce of the Investor          Markets      Rules and Enforcement           For Firms       For Registered Individuals      Newsroom



HOME
  / NEWSROOM / PUBLICATIONS / ACCOUNT SUPERVISION GUIDANCE




     Account Supervision Guidance

                                                                                                                                     October 14, 2021
     Executive Summary
                                                                                                                                     GN-3900-20-001
     E(ective Date: December 31, 2021
                                                                                                                                     Type: Guidance Note
     In this Guidance Note, we set out IIROC’s expectations for Dealer Member (Dealer)                                               Distribute internally to:
     supervision of client account activity.                                                                                         Institutional, Legal and Compliance, Operations,
                                                                                                                                     Research, Retail, Senior Management, Training
     Registered Individuals1 are primarily responsible for compliance with business conduct                                          Rulebook connection: IIROC Rules
     requirements. However, Rule 3900 requires Dealer supervision of account activity to ensure
     compliance with IIROC requirements, securities laws and other applicable laws. The
     standards in Rule 3900 provide Supervisors with guidelines to monitor the handling of these                                     Contact
     responsibilities by Registered Individuals.
                                                                                                                                     Member Regulation Policy
     Dealers’ supervisory structures should include policies and procedures that address                                             memberpolicymailbox@ciro.ca
     screening of trading activity to detect issues for further enquiry or investigation. A Dealer is
     not required to enquire into or investigate every trade that meets the criteria in Rule 3900 or
     this Guidance, but should exercise reasonable judgment in selecting items for further
     investigation.

     This Guidance focuses on the requirements in Rule 3900 of the IIROC Rules2 - Supervision.
     Guidance on IIROC’s Universal Market Integrity Rules’ (UMIR) trading supervision
     requirements can be found in Notice 17-0190.

     Related Projects

     In IIROC’s Three Year Strategic Plan and Priorities for Fiscal 20203, we discuss modernizing
     our approach to supervision. Generally, our supervisory requirements are technology neutral
     and we support Dealers using automation to assist them with supervisory tasks. It is
     reasonable to think that as Dealers’ technological capabilities improve, they will be able to
     supervise accounts on a more comprehensive basis. However, we have received requests
     from industry participants for more clarity about how our rules are to be applied to evolving
     business models and processes (e.g. the use of algorithm logic). Consequently, we are
     working on a number of separate projects to modernize our approach to supervision and
     provide the clarity industry is seeking. This work will result in, among other things, new
     guidance and updates to this Guidance. In the meantime, we encourage you to contact us if
     you have any questions relating to this topic.



        1      In this guidance, “Registered Individual” refers to Registered Representatives, Investment
               Representatives, Portfolio Managers and Associate Portfolio Managers.

        2      In this guidance, all rule references are to the IIROC Rules unless otherwise speciﬁed.

        3      See IIROC Notice 19-0099 – IIROC’S Three Year Strategic Plan and Priorities for Fiscal 2020




     Table of contents

     — Supervisory structure
     — General considerations
     — Considerations when appointing Supervisors
     — Considerations speciﬁc to retail business outside head oDce
     — Retail account activity supervision policies and procedures
     — First-tier reviews
     — Daily reviews
     — Monthly reviews
     — Second-tier reviews
     — Daily reviews
     — Monthly reviews




     1. Supervision of client accounts
     Part B of Rule 3900 sets out the general requirement for Dealers to establish and maintain
     written policies and procedures for supervising accounts, which includes its supervision
     standards and account activity review steps. Parts C through G of Rule 3900 contain more
     speciﬁc supervision requirements for dicerent account types4. For example, Part C contains
     the requirements for supervision of retail client accounts, and Part G contains those for
     managed and discretionary accounts.




     1.1 Supervisory structure

     1.1.1 General considerations
            An ecective supervisory structure considers the Dealer’s business model, which
            includes the following factors:
                  types of products traded and securities ocered,
                  type of trading the Dealer and its Registered Individuals engage in,
                  location of the Dealer’s Supervisory personnel and its Registered Individuals, and
                  the dicerent functions their Supervisors may be responsible for.

            The Dealer’s supervisory system should enable Supervisors to properly fulﬁll their
            functions.

            Supervisors should have access to the information necessary to properly conduct their
            supervision. To review client accounts, this includes readily accessible client and
            account activity information, including:
                 receipts,
                  deposits,
                  withdrawals, and
                  journal entries.

            Supervisors should have the authority to take ecective and timely remedial action
            when they detect activity that falls or appears to fall outside the bounds of proper
            conduct, just and equitable principles of trade or good business practice. We consider
            escalating to a more senior Supervisor or Executive an acceptable action.



     1.1.2 Considerations when appointing Supervisors
     When appointing Supervisors, Dealers should consider the following:

     Supervisors must be qualiﬁed to supervise trading activity in all products traded by those
     under their supervision.5 If a Supervisor is unqualiﬁed to supervise trading activity in certain
     products by those under their supervision, a Dealer may divide the supervision between two
     or more Supervisors, provided:
          there are appropriate mechanisms for them to communicate with one another,
            the system ensures the Dealer maintains an overall view of the client’s situation and
            activity, and
            the assignment of responsibilities is clear and complete.

            Dealers can also appointment a primary Supervisor that other Supervisor(s) advise on
            the activity the primary Supervisor is unqualiﬁed to supervise.

     Dealers must provide back-up during Supervisors’ absences.6 For any prolonged Supervisor
     absences, the back-up Supervisor(s) should be aware of any speciﬁc ongoing issues they
     need to monitor.

     Dealers should ensure that where a Supervisors is dually-registered and also advises or
     trades for their own clients, another Supervisor reviews that Supervisor’s advice to and
     trades for clients.



     1.1.3 Considerations speciﬁc to retail business
     outside head oSce
     Dealers conducting retail business outside their head oDce should consider the following:

            Resident Supervisors7 are best positioned to know the Registered Individuals in their
            oDce, meet clients, understand local conditions and needs, facilitate timely approval
            of new accounts and respond immediately to issues. However, Dealers can determine
            the necessity of a resident Supervisor based on:

            the number of Registered Individuals in the location,
                 Registered Individuals’ experience in the location,
                  the business conducted in the location,
                  Supervisor availability in nearby locations, and
                  other systems and controls mitigating remote supervision risk.

            Business locations without Resident Supervisors should have an assigned outside
            Supervisor. The outside Supervisor should visit the location periodically to review
            business conduct and compliance with applicable laws. Dealers’ policies and
            procedures should speciﬁcally address these outside Supervisor visits.




     1.2 Retail account activity supervision
     policies and procedures
     The following should be considered when developing policies and procedures addressing the
     supervision of retail client accounts, as required by Part C of Rule 3900:

            Dealers may conduct their reviews on a pre-trade or post-trade basis. A robust pre-
            trade review process may lessen or remove the need for post-trade reviews.

            Review procedures should cover all retail account types. For example, a Dealer who
            ocers commission and fee-based accounts cannot select accounts for review solely
            based on commission levels, they should also have a procedure for selecting fee-
            based accounts.

            Patterns of activity may not be apparent by reviewing single trades. If a Dealer
            reviews trades over a longer period, they may detect issues with the overall account
            activity even if each trade is suitable for the client.

            Dealers should review non-trade issues such as late payment, margin problems, trade
            cancellations or suspicious transfers and ﬂows of funds or securities.

            Dealers may use a risk-based approach to select the activity for post-trade review,
            provided the reviewer has all relevant information they need to assess the risk. They
            can also use this approach to determine the review period. A Dealer may determine
            some clients present a higher risk of improper market activity, such as those who
            have access to material non-public information about issuers, holders of control
            blocks of public issuers and market professionals.

            Dealers should include employee and agent account activity in their review.

            Dealers should review accounts on a timely basis. Their timing should be designed to
            identify matters requiring attention as quickly as possible.

            During a review, Supervisors should have access to and consider information about
            clients that may present a higher risk of improper market activity.

            Dealers can use technology to select speciﬁc activity for review.



     2. Two-tier reviews
     Based on their business model, Dealers may choose to use a two-tiered trade review system
     as described in this Guidance. We traditionally considered a two-tier system of post-trade
     activity review acceptable for Dealers with multiple business locations conducting retail
     account activity. However, other supervisory systems can be used based on the Dealer’s
     business model provided they meet our daily and monthly trade supervision requirements8.
     We invite any Dealer considering a dicerent supervisory system to speak with us.




     2.1 First-tier reviews
     Resident Supervisors will normally conduct the ﬁrst-tier review at their respective business
     location. Dealers can conduct these reviews in a central location (head oDce or regional
     oDce) provided:

            there are resources available to conduct the review at that location, and
            the Dealer has adequate procedures for dealing with any issues identiﬁed.



     2.1.1 Daily reviews
     Dealers should design their ﬁrst-tier daily review of the previous day's trading to detect the
     issues in section 3945. They should complete this review one business day after the trading
     activity occurs, unless precluded by unusual circumstances.



     2.1.2 Monthly reviews
     A ﬁrst-tier monthly review should cover the same areas as daily activity reviews. Dealers
     may not be able to review every retail account statement produced. A ﬁrst-tier monthly
     review starts with the selection of retail client accounts. Dealers should design this selection
     to detect improper account activity. For example, a Dealer could review the activity of all
     clients charged gross commissions of $1,500 or more for that month.

     A ﬁrst-tier monthly review should include all non-client accounts with any activity other
     than dividend and interest payments.

     Dealers should complete this review within 21 days of the review period, unless precluded
     by unusual circumstances.




     2.2 Second-tier reviews
     While a Dealer’s head oDce will normally conduct the second-tier review, a regional oDce
     could also conduct it. Second-tier supervision has a dicerent purpose and is generally not
     at the same depth as ﬁrst-tier supervision. Dealers should design their second-tier
     supervision to:

            ensure no serious account issues were missed by ﬁrst-tier supervision, and
            ensure ﬁrst-tier supervision is conducted adequately.

     Where the second-tier reviews are conducted by personnel who do not have the authority to
     resolve the issues they identify, the Dealer should have procedures for referring these issues
     to a Supervisor who has the appropriate authority.



     2.2.1 Daily reviews
     Dealers should include criteria for trading activity subject to second-tier daily reviews in
     their policies and procedures. For example, the following criteria would satisfy Rule 3900:

            stock trades with a value over $5,000 and a price under $5.00 per share,
            stock trades with value over $20,000 and a price at or over $5.00 per share,
            bond trades over $100,000 value per trade,
            non-client trading,
            producing branch managers’ client accounts,
            all client accounts not reviewed by a branch manager,
            trade cancellations,
            restricted account trading,
            suspense account trading,
            account number changes,
            late payments, and
            outstanding margin calls.

     Dealers should complete this review one business day after the activity occurs, unless
     precluded by unusual circumstances.



     2.2.2 Monthly reviews
     Dealers should select accounts for second-tier review based on criteria in their policies and
     procedures. For example, the following review criteria would satisfy Rule 3900:

            accounts of clients charged more than $3,000 in commission during the month, and
            accounts of all clients and non-clients charged more than $1,500 in commissions
            during the month not subject to a ﬁrst-tier level review, including producing ﬁrst level
            Supervisors’ client accounts.

     Dealers should complete this review within 21 days of the review period, unless precluded
     by unusual circumstances.



     3. Other activity
     Dealers must have policies and procedures that address identifying, dealing with and
     keeping ﬁrst level Supervisors informed about other client related matters such as:

            client complaints,
            cash account violations,
            transfers of funds and securities between unrelated accounts or between non-client
            and client accounts or deposits from non-client to client accounts, and
            trading while under-margined.9



     4. Applicable rules
     IIROC Rules this Guidance Note relates to:

            Rule 3900.



     5. Related notices
     This Guidance relates to:

            Notice 19-0201 – AML Compliance Guidance.

     This Guidance Note was published under Notice 20-0007 – Notice of
     Approval/Implementation – Guidance Review Project – Group 1.




        4      Part C – Supervision of retail client accounts, Part D – Supervision of institutional client
               accounts, Part E – Supervision of order execution only accounts, Part F - Supervision of
               options, futures contracts and futures contract options trading accounts and Part G -
               Supervision of discretionary accounts and managed accounts.

        5      See subsections 2602(2) and 3905(5).

        6      See subsection 3925(4).

        7      “Resident Supervisors” are Supervisors who work in a speciﬁc Dealer branch oDce.

        8      See subsection 3945(1).

        9      See subsection 3946(1).




                                                                               Other CIRO sites:
                                                                               Corporate and Government Debt         CIRO Services
                                                                               Trade Information
                                                                               Members Only Website                  Notice of Basis Order                                            




Website Terms of Use     Privacy   Accessibility (PDF)   Contact Us
