Investment Dealer and Partially Consolidated Rules
January 8, 2026
                                                                Investment Dealer and Partially Consolidated Rules

SERIES 1000 | INTERPRETATION AND PRINCIPLES RULES

RULE 1100 | INTERPRETATION

1101. Introduction
           (1)     Rule 1100 sets out general rules of interpretation that apply to the Corporation requirements, and
                   certain specific interpretative provisions.
1102. General interpretation
           (1)     If the context requires, words in the singular may include the plural and words in the plural may
                   include the singular.
           (2)     All times referred to in the Corporation requirements are Eastern Standard Time, or Eastern
                   Daylight Savings Time when in effect, unless stated otherwise.
           (3)     References to:
                   (i)      a Dealer Member include its Approved Persons and employees, if the context is appropriate,
                   (ii)     a Dealer Member’s board of directors include a Dealer Member’s equivalent governance
                            body for a Dealer Member that is not a corporation,
                   (iii)    a corporation, as a type of entity to which the Corporation requirements apply, includes
                            unincorporated entities if the context is appropriate, and
                   (iv)     provinces include all provinces and territories of Canada.
           (4)     In the event of any dispute as to the intent or meaning of any provisions within the Corporation
                   requirements, the interpretation of the Board is final, subject to any appeal procedures that may
                   be available.
1103. Delegation by a Dealer Member
           (1)     If a Corporation requirement requires an individual at a Dealer Member to perform a function, that
                   individual may delegate the tasks or activities involved in performing the function unless the
                   Corporation requirements specifically prohibit such delegation.
           (2)     An individual who delegates tasks or activities cannot delegate the responsibility for the function.
1104. Electronic signatures
           (1)     Subject to applicable laws, a Dealer Member may use an electronic or digital signature where a
                   signature is required by Corporation requirements for an agreement, contract or transaction
                   between a Dealer Member and its clients, Approved Persons, the Corporation, other Dealer
                   Members or any other person unless specifically prohibited.
1105. Transitional provision
           (1)     The Corporation is the corporation continuing from the amalgamation effective January 1, 2023 of
                   the Investment Industry Regulatory Organization of Canada and the Mutual Fund Dealers
                   Association of Canada and as a result, for greater certainty:
                   (i)      any reference in these Rules to the Corporation includes the Investment Industry Regulatory
                            Organization of Canada prior to January 1, 2023,



Series 1000 | Interpretation and Principles Rules                                                                Rule 1100
                                                               Investment Dealer and Partially Consolidated Rules

                   (ii)     any person subject to the jurisdiction of the Investment Industry Regulatory Organization of
                            Canada prior to January 1, 2023 remains subject to the jurisdiction of the Corporation in
                            respect of any action or matter that occurred while that person was subject to the
                            jurisdiction of the Investment Industry Regulatory Organization of Canada at the time of
                            such action or matter,
                   (iii)    any individual that was an Approved Person under the Investment Industry Regulatory
                            Organization of Canada requirements immediately prior to January 1, 2023 continues to be
                            an Approved Person in respect of these Rules if that individual has not ceased to be
                            approved by the Corporation, and
                   (iv)     the provisions of the articles, by-laws, rules, policies and any other instrument or
                            requirement prescribed or adopted by the Investment Industry Regulatory Organization of
                            Canada pursuant to such articles, by-laws, rules or policies, any approval, ruling or order
                            granted or issued by the Investment Industry Regulatory Organization of Canada, in each
                            case while a person was subject to the jurisdiction of the Investment Industry Regulatory
                            Organization of Canada will continue to be applicable, whether presently effective or
                            effective at a later date, to that person in accordance with their terms and may be enforced
                            by the Corporation.
           (2)     Any exemption from a Rule of the Corporation, including for greater certainty, an exemption
                   granted by the Investment Industry Regulatory Organization of Canada, in effect prior to the
                   coming into effect of these Rules shall remain in effect subsequent to the coming into effect of
                   these Rules:
                   (i)      subject to any condition included in the exemption, and
                   (ii)     provided that the applicable prior rule of the Corporation on which the exemption is based,
                            substantially continues in these Rules.
           (3)     The Corporation shall continue the regulation of persons subject to the jurisdiction of the
                   Investment Industry Regulatory Organization of Canada that was formerly conducted by the
                   Investment Industry Regulatory Organization of Canada, including any enforcement or review
                   proceedings, in accordance with the by-laws, rules and policies of the Investment Industry
                   Regulatory Organization of Canada, and any other instrument or requirement prescribed or
                   adopted by the Investment Industry Regulatory Organization of Canada pursuant to such by-laws,
                   rules or policies, in each case in effect at the time of any action or matter that occurred while that
                   person was subject to the jurisdiction of the Investment Industry Regulatory Organization of
                   Canada.
           (4)     Each individual who on December 31, 2022 was a member of the Hearing Committee of the
                   Investment Industry Regulatory Organization of Canada shall be automatically deemed to be a
                   member of a District Hearing Committee of the Corporation as of January 1, 2023 and the term of
                   each such individual as a member of a District Hearing Committee of the Corporation shall expire
                   on the date that his or her term as a member of the Hearing Committee of the Investment
                   Industry Regulatory Organization of Canada would have expired or at such other time as the
                   Appointments Committee of the Corporation shall otherwise determine.
           (5)     Any enforcement or review proceedings commenced by the Investment Industry Regulatory
                   Organization of Canada in accordance with its rules prior to January 1, 2023:

Series 1000 | Interpretation and Principles Rules                                                                 Rule 1100
                                                                Investment Dealer and Partially Consolidated Rules

                   (i)      in respect of which a hearing panel has been appointed, shall proceed in accordance with
                            the by-laws, decisions, directions, policies, regulations, rules, rulings and practice and
                            procedure of the Investment Industry Regulatory Organization of Canada in effect and
                            applicable to such enforcement or review proceeding at the time it was commenced and
                            shall continue to be heard by the same hearing panel, and
                   (ii)     in respect of which a hearing panel has not been appointed, shall proceed in accordance
                            with the by-laws, decisions, directions, policies, regulations, rules, rulings and practice and
                            procedure of the Investment Industry Regulatory Organization of Canada, in effect and
                            applicable to such enforcement or review proceeding at the time it was commenced,
                            provided that, despite any provision of the by-laws, decisions, directions, policies,
                            regulations, rules, rulings or practice and procedure of the Investment Industry Regulatory
                            Organization of Canada in effect and applicable to such enforcement or review proceeding,
                            these Rules shall apply to the appointment of the hearing panel.
1106. – 1199. Reserved.




Series 1000 | Interpretation and Principles Rules                                                                   Rule 1100
                                                                  Investment Dealer and Partially Consolidated Rules


RULE 1200 | DEFINITIONS

1201. Definitions
            (1)     Some terms used throughout the Corporation requirements are defined in subsection 1201(2).
                    Additional terms are set out in the Corporation General By-Law No. 1 and in Form 1. Terms that
                    are used only in a single Rule are defined in that Rule.
                    Any term not defined in subsection 1201(2), in Corporation General By-Law No. 1, in Form 1 or in
                    a specific Rule, which is defined in securities laws, has the same meaning as provided for in the
                    securities laws.
                    When a prescribed or adopted policy defines a term that the Corporation requirements also
                    defines, the definition contained in the policy prevails to the extent of any inconsistency, when
                    interpreting that policy.
            (2)     The following terms have the meanings set out when used in the Corporation requirements:
                      “acceptable clearing corporation” The same meaning as set out in Form 1, General Notes and
                                                        Definitions.
                      “acceptable counterparty”           The same meaning as set out in Form 1, General Notes and
                                                          Definitions.
                      “acceptable exchange”               The same meaning as set out in Form 1, General Notes and
                                                          Definitions
                      “acceptable institution”            The same meaning as set out in Form 1, General Notes and
                                                          Definitions.
                      “acceptable foreign marketplace” Any entity operating as:
                                                       (i) an exchange, or a quotation and trade reporting system, or an
                                                            alternative trading system for securities or derivatives
                                                            transactions that is subject to legislation and oversight by a
                                                            central or regional government authority in the country of
                                                            operation, or
                                                       (ii) a quotation and trade reporting system, or an alternative trading
                                                            system for securities or derivatives transactions that is subject to
                                                            the rules of a self-regulatory organization, which is subject to
                                                            legislation and oversight by a central or regional government
                                                            authority in the country of operation.
                                                       The legislation or oversight regime must provide for or recognize the
                                                       exchange’s, or the quotation and trade reporting system’s, or the
                                                       alternative trading system’s powers of compliance and enforcement
                                                       over its members or participants.
                      “acceptable securities location”    The same meaning as set out in Form 1, General Notes and
                                                          Definitions.
                      “actively engaged in the business   Participating in the Dealer Member’s regular business activities,
                      of the Dealer Member”               operations or promotion of a Dealer Member’s services. It does not
                                                          include participating in board or board corporate governance
                                                          committee meetings or occasional referrals to the Dealer Member
                                                          that were not solicited on the Dealer Member’s behalf.




Series 1000 | Interpretation and Principles Rules                                                                        Rule 1200
                                                              Investment Dealer and Partially Consolidated Rules


                      “advertisement”                 Any commercials, commentaries and any published materials
                                                      promoting a Dealer Member’s business, including materials
                                                      disseminated or made available electronically.
                      “advisory account”              An account which is subject to a suitability determination where:
                                                      (i) the client is responsible for all investment decisions but is able to
                                                           rely on advice given by a Registered Representative, and
                                                      (ii) the Dealer Member and the Registered Representative are
                                                           responsible for all advice given.
                      “advisory capacity”             Providing advice to an issuer in return for remuneration other than
                                                      trading advice or related services.
                      “affiliate”                     Where used to indicate a relationship between two corporations,
                                                      means:
                                                      (i) one corporation is a subsidiary of the other corporation,
                                                      (ii) both corporations are subsidiaries of the same corporation, or
                                                      (iii) both corporations are controlled by the same person.
                      “agent”                         An individual who is subject to the principal and agent relationship
                                                      requirements set out in Rule 2300.
                      “applicable laws”               All laws, statutes, ordinances, regulations, rules, orders, judgments,
                                                      decrees or other regulatory directions, applicable to a Regulated
                                                      Person or its employees, partners, directors or officers, in the
                                                      conduct of their business.
                      “approved investor”             An industry investor (defined in clause 2102(1)) or any other person
                                                      who requires the approval of the Corporation to invest in a Dealer
                                                      Member.
                      “Approved Person”               An individual approved by the Corporation under these Rules to carry
                                                      out a function for a Dealer Member, namely, the following
                                                      individuals:
                                                      (i) Associate Portfolio Manager,
                                                      (ii) Chief Compliance Officer,
                                                      (iii) Chief Financial Officer,
                                                      (iv) Director,
                                                      (v) Executive,
                                                      (vi) Investment Representative,
                                                      (vii) Portfolio Manager,
                                                      (viii) Registered Representative,
                                                      (ix) Supervisor,
                                                      (x) Trader, or
                                                      (xi) Ultimate Designated Person.
                      “associate”                     The same meaning as set out in General By-law No. 1, section 1.1.
                      “Associate Portfolio Manager”   An individual designated by the Dealer Member and approved by the
                                                      Corporation to provide discretionary portfolio management for
                                                      managed accounts under the supervision of a Portfolio Manager.
                      “beneficial owner”              A person who has beneficial ownership of securities.




Series 1000 | Interpretation and Principles Rules                                                                      Rule 1200
                                                            Investment Dealer and Partially Consolidated Rules


                      “beneficial ownership”        Beneficial ownership of securities includes ownership:
                                                    (i) of securities by:
                                                        (a) a corporation, or
                                                        (b) affiliates of a corporation,
                                                             that is controlled by a person,
                                                             or
                                                    (ii) by a corporation of securities beneficially owned by the affiliates
                                                         of the corporation.
                      “Board”                       The same meaning as set out in General By-law No. 1, section 1.1.
                      “bundled order”               Has the same meaning as set out in the Universal Market
                                                    Integrity Rules.
                      “business day”                A day other than Saturday, Sunday and any statutory holiday in the
                                                    relevant District.
                      “business location”           A location where an activity that requires registration or Corporation
                                                    approval is carried out by or on behalf of a Dealer Member, and
                                                    includes a residence if regular and ongoing activity that requires
                                                    registration or approval is carried out from the residence or if records
                                                    relating to an activity that requires registration or approval are kept
                                                    at the residence.
                      “carrying broker”             A Dealer Member that carries client accounts for another Dealer
                                                    Member or for a Mutual Fund Dealer Member, which includes the
                                                    clearing and settlement of trades, the maintenance of records of
                                                    client transactions and accounts, and the custody of client cash,
                                                    securities and precious metals bullion, in accordance with the
                                                    requirements set out in Rule 2400.
                      “CDS”                         CDS Clearing and Depository Services Inc.
                      “chartered bank”              A bank incorporated under the Bank Act (Canada).
                      “Chief Compliance Officer”    An individual approved by the Corporation to act as the chief
                                                    compliance officer of a Dealer Member.
                      “Chief Financial Officer”     An individual approved by the Corporation to act as the chief
                                                    financial officer of a Dealer Member.
                      “clearing day”                Any day CDS or another acceptable clearing corporation is open for
                                                    business.
                      “control”                     Where used to indicate control of a corporation, means a person
                                                    who has beneficial ownership of voting securities in the corporation
                                                    that carry more than 50% of the votes for election of directors of the
                                                    corporation and such votes allow the person to elect a majority of
                                                    the directors; but if a hearing panel orders that a person does or
                                                    does not control the corporation under the Corporation
                                                    requirements, that order defines their relationship under the
                                                    Corporation requirements.
                      “Corporation”                 The same meaning as set out in General By-law No. 1, section 1.1.
                      “Corporation Membership       The policy setting out the Corporation’s Membership disclosure
                      Disclosure Policy”            requirements for Dealer Members, as made available on the
                                                    Corporation’s website.




Series 1000 | Interpretation and Principles Rules                                                                    Rule 1200
                                                                Investment Dealer and Partially Consolidated Rules


                      “Corporation requirements”         Requirements set out within the Corporation’s articles, by-laws and
                                                         rules, along with all other instruments prescribed or adopted within
                                                         Corporation’s by-laws and rules, and Corporation rulings, except, for
                                                         the purposes of these Rules, requirements applicable to Mutual Fund
                                                         Dealer Members and their Approved Persons and employees are to
                                                         be excluded.
                      “correspondence”                   Any advertisement or business related communication, including any
                                                         written or electronic communication, prepared for distribution to a
                                                         single current or prospective client, but not for distribution to
                                                         multiple clients or the general public.
                      “Dealer Member”                    The same meaning as set out in General By-law No. 1, section 1.1,
                                                         except, for the purposes of these Rules, Mutual Fund Dealer
                                                         Members are to be excluded.
                      “Dealer Member related             Acting as a Dealer Member, or carrying on business that is necessary
                      activities”                        or incidental to being a Dealer Member. The Board may include or
                                                         exclude any activities from this definition.
                      “Dealer Member’s auditor”          An auditor on the Corporation approved list of accounting firms
                                                         chosen by the Dealer Member to be its auditor.
                      “debt security”                    Any security that provides the holder with a legal right, in specified
                                                         circumstances, to demand payment of the amount owing and
                                                         includes a debtor-creditor relationship. The term includes securities
                                                         with short-term maturities or mandatory tender periods such as
                                                         commercial paper and floating rate notes as well as traditional notes
                                                         and bonds.
                      “derivative”                       A contract or an instrument classified as:
                                                         (i) an option, swap, futures contract, forward contract, futures
                                                             contract option, contract for difference, or
                                                         (ii) any other financial or commodity contract or instrument whose
                                                              market price, value, delivery obligations, payment obligations or
                                                              settlement obligations are derived from, referenced to or based
                                                              on an underlying interest, including a value, price, rate, variable,
                                                              index, event, probability or thing,
                                                         but does not include a contract or instrument determined by the
                                                         Corporation to be classified in a category other than a derivative.
                      “designated rating organization”   The same meaning as set out in Form 1, General Notes and
                                                         Definitions.




Series 1000 | Interpretation and Principles Rules                                                                          Rule 1200
                                                                  Investment Dealer and Partially Consolidated Rules


                      “designated Supervisor”              A Supervisor that the Dealer Member makes responsible for a
                                                           supervisory role defined in the Corporation requirements, including a
                                                           Supervisor responsible for:
                                                           (i) the supervision of futures contract, forward contract, contracts
                                                                 for difference, futures contract option and similar derivative
                                                                 accounts under Part F of Rule 3900,
                                                           (ii) the supervision of options and similar derivative accounts under
                                                                 Part F of Rule 3900,
                                                           (iii) the supervision of discretionary accounts under Part G of Rule
                                                                 3900,
                                                           (iv) the opening of new accounts and the supervision of account
                                                                 activity under Part B of Rule 3900,
                                                           (v) the supervision of managed accounts under Part G of Rule 3900,
                                                           (vi) the pre-approval of advertising, sales literature and
                                                                 correspondence under Part A of Rule 3600, and
                                                           (vii) the supervision of research reports under Part B of Rule 3600.
                      “direct electronic access account”   An account which is not subject to suitability determination (other
                                                           than as required by clauses 3402(3)(i) and 3403(4)(i)) where:
                                                           (i) the client has been provided with direct electronic access within
                                                                  the meaning of National Instrument 23-103,
                                                           (ii) the Dealer Member provides no recommendations to purchase,
                                                                  sell, hold or exchange any security, including any class of
                                                                  security or security of a class of issuer, or transact in any
                                                                  derivative and
                                                           (iii) the Dealer Member complies with the Universal Market
                                                                  Integrity Rule requirements applicable to the direct electronic
                                                                  access service offering and the requirements of NI 23-103.
                      “Director”                           A member of a Dealer Member’s board of directors or an individual
                                                           performing similar functions at a Dealer Member that is not a
                                                           corporation.
                      “discretionary account”              An account which is subject to the suitability determination and over
                                                           which the client has given discretionary authority where:
                                                           (i) the Dealer Member has not solicited the discretionary authority,
                                                           (ii) the discretionary authority is accepted to accommodate a client
                                                                 who is frequently or temporarily unavailable to authorize trades,
                                                           (iii) the discretionary authority has not been renewed, and
                                                           (iv) the term of the discretionary authority does not exceed
                                                                 12 months.
                      “District”                           The same meaning as set out in General By-law No. 1, section 1.1.
                      “domestic gross customer margin      A framework to comply with a futures segregation and portability
                      model”                               customer protection regime where the amount of margin that a
                                                           Dealer Member must post on behalf of its clients to a clearing
                                                           corporation in Canada is the sum of the amounts of margin required
                                                           for each client.
                      “early warning excess”               This is calculated and has the same meaning as set out in
                                                           Statement C of Form 1.
                      “early warning reserve”              This is calculated and has the same meaning as set out in
                                                           Statement C of Form 1.


Series 1000 | Interpretation and Principles Rules                                                                          Rule 1200
                                                                Investment Dealer and Partially Consolidated Rules


                      “equity security”                 An interest, investment or security in a corporation in respect of
                                                        which the holder has no legal right to demand payment until the
                                                        corporation or its board of directors has passed a resolution
                                                        declaring a dividend or other distribution or a winding up of the
                                                        corporation.
                      “employee”                        An employee or agent of a Dealer Member.
                      “Enforcement Staff”               Corporation staff who are authorized to conduct enforcement
                                                        activities on behalf of the Corporation, including conducting
                                                        investigations and initiating and conducting disciplinary proceedings.
                      “Executive”                       A Dealer Member’s partner, Director or officer who is involved in the
                                                        Dealer Member’s senior management, including anyone fulfilling the
                                                        role of chair or vice-chair of the board of directors, chief executive
                                                        officer, president, chief administrative officer, chief operating officer
                                                        or a person acting in a similar capacity who is head of operations,
                                                        Chief Financial Officer, Chief Compliance Officer, Ultimate Designated
                                                        Person, member of an executive management committee or any
                                                        other position that the Dealer Member designates as an Executive
                                                        position.
                      “free credit balance”             Free credit balance means:
                                                        (i) for cash and margin accounts, the credit balance less an amount
                                                              equal to the aggregate of:
                                                            (a) the market value of short positions, and
                                                            (b) margin required on those short positions, and
                                                        (ii) for futures accounts, the credit balance less an amount equal to
                                                              the aggregate of:
                                                             (a) margin required to carry open futures contracts or futures
                                                                 contract option positions, less
                                                             (b) any equity in those contracts, plus
                                                             (c) any deficits in those contracts.
                                                        However, the aggregate amount must not exceed the dollar amount
                                                        of the credit balance.
                      “futures segregation and          A set of rules and procedures that enable a clearing corporation to
                      portability customer protection   operate according to the standards outlined in Principle 14 of the
                      regime”                           Principles for Financial Market Infrastructures published by the Bank
                                                        for International Settlements and the International Organization of
                                                        Securities Commissions, regarding client futures positions and
                                                        collateral that support these positions.
                      “Global Legal Entity Identifier   Has the same meaning as set out in the Universal Market
                      System"                           Integrity Rules.
                      “guarantee”                       An agreement to be responsible for the liabilities of a person or to
                                                        provide security for a person; and includes an agreement to:
                                                        (i) purchase an investment, property or services,
                                                        (ii) to supply funds, property or services, or
                                                        (iii) to make an investment,
                                                        if the agreement’s main purpose is to allow a person to perform its
                                                        obligations under a security or investment, or to assure an investor in
                                                        a security that the person will perform its obligations.



Series 1000 | Interpretation and Principles Rules                                                                        Rule 1200
                                                            Investment Dealer and Partially Consolidated Rules


                      “hearing”                     A hearing in connection with a proceeding, proposed proceeding or
                                                    other matter under the Corporation requirements, other than a
                                                    prehearing conference (defined in section 8402).
                      “hearing committee”           A hearing committee of a District appointed under Rule 8300.
                      “hearing panel”               A panel selected by the National Hearing Officer to conduct a hearing
                                                    or prehearing conference (defined in section 8402).
                      “hedger”                      A non-individual that:
                                                    (i) is exposed to one or more risks as a necessary part of its
                                                         business activities, and
                                                    (ii) seeks to hedge such risk by engaging in derivatives transactions
                                                         where:
                                                         (a) the underlying interest for the derivatives is the same as or
                                                               materially related to the underlying interest for the risk,
                                                         (b) the intended effect of the derivatives is to:
                                                              (I) eliminate or reduce the risk related to fluctuations in
                                                                    the market value of the underlying interest or position
                                                                    being hedged, or
                                                              (II) substitute the risk associated with one currency for the
                                                                    risk associated with another currency, provided the
                                                                    aggregate amount of currency risk to which the hedger
                                                                    is exposed is not increased by the substitution, and
                                                         (c) there are reasonable grounds to believe that the market
                                                             value changes in the positions resulting from the transactions
                                                             will completely or materially offset market value changes in
                                                             the underlying interest or position being hedged.
                      “holding company”             Of a corporation means either:
                                                    (i) another corporation that owns :
                                                         (a) more than 50 per cent of each class or series of the voting
                                                             securities, and
                                                         (b) more than 50 per cent of each class or series of the
                                                             participating securities,
                                                         either directly in the corporation or in the holding company of
                                                         that corporation,
                                                    but does not include:
                                                    (ii) an industry investor (defined in clause 2102(1)(i)) that owns the
                                                          corporation’s securities in the capacity of an industry investor,
                                                          or
                                                    (iii) a corporation that the Corporation has ordered is not a holding
                                                          company of that corporation.
                      “individual”                  A natural person.
                      “industry member”             A current or former director, officer, partner or employee of a
                                                    Member or Regulated Person, or an individual who is otherwise
                                                    suitable and qualified for appointment to a hearing committee.




Series 1000 | Interpretation and Principles Rules                                                                   Rule 1200
                                                               Investment Dealer and Partially Consolidated Rules


                      “institutional client”            A person who is:
                                                        (i) an acceptable counterparty,
                                                        (ii) an acceptable institution,
                                                        (iii) a regulated entity,
                                                        (iv) a registrant under securities law, other than an individual
                                                              registrant,
                                                        (v) a non-individual with total securities and precious metals
                                                              bullion under administration or management exceeding $10
                                                              million,
                                                        (vi) an individual with total securities and precious metals bullion
                                                              under administration or management exceeding $10 million
                                                              who requests and consents to being classified as an
                                                              institutional client, or
                                                        (vii) a hedger who requests and consents to being classified as an
                                                              institutional client for accounts with qualifying hedging
                                                              activities and hedge positions.
                      “internal controls”              The financial and operational policies and procedures established,
                                                       maintained and applied by the Dealer Member’s management to
                                                       provide reasonable assurance of the orderly and efficient conduct of
                                                       the Dealer Member’s business.
                      “inter-dealer bond broker”       A person that provides information, trading and communications
                                                       services for domestic debt securities trading among inter-dealer bond
                                                       broker clients (defined in section 7302).
                      “introducing broker”             A Dealer Member or a Mutual Fund Dealer Member that introduces
                                                       its client accounts to one or more carrying brokers, in accordance
                                                       with the requirements set out in Rule 2400.
                      “investigation”                  The powers of the Corporation to initiate and conduct enforcement
                                                       investigations as set out in Rule 8100.
                      “Investment Representative”      An individual, approved by the Corporation, to trade in, but not
                                                       advise on, securities or derivatives, on the Dealer Member’s behalf,
                                                       including where that individual deals only in mutual funds.
                      “IPF” or “Investor Protection    The same meaning as set out for the term IPF in General By-law No.
                      Fund”                            1, section 1.1.
                      “IPF Disclosure Policy”          The policy setting out the Investor Protection Fund’s membership
                                                       disclosure requirements, as made available on IPF’s website.

                      “Legal Entity Identifier”        A unique identification code assigned to a person in accordance with
                                                       standards set by the Global Legal Entity Identifier System.
                      "Legal Entity Identifier System Has the same meaning as set out in the Universal Market
                      Regulatory Oversight Committee" Integrity Rules.
                      “listed security”                Has the same meaning as set out in the Universal Market
                                                       Integrity Rules.
                      “listed derivative”              A derivative that is traded on an exchange pursuant to standardized
                                                       terms and conditions set out by that exchange and whose trades are
                                                       cleared and settled by a clearing agency.




Series 1000 | Interpretation and Principles Rules                                                                      Rule 1200
                                                            Investment Dealer and Partially Consolidated Rules


                      “managed account”             An account which is subject to a suitability determination where:
                                                    (i) investment decisions are made on a continuing basis by a
                                                          Portfolio Manager or an Associate Portfolio Manager or a third
                                                          party hired by the Dealer Member, and
                                                    (ii) the Dealer Member, or a third party hired by the Dealer
                                                          Member, and the Portfolio Manager or Associate Portfolio
                                                          Manager are responsible for all investment decisions made.
                      “manipulative and deceptive    Any manipulative or deceptive methods, act or practice in connection
                      activities”                    with any order or trade on a marketplace, and includes the entry of
                                                     an order or the execution of a trade that would create or could
                                                     reasonably be expected to create:
                                                     (i) a false or misleading appearance of trading activity in or interest
                                                         in the purchase or sale of a security, or transaction in a
                                                         derivative, or
                                                    (ii) an artificial ask price, bid price or sale price for the security, or
                                                         the transaction in a derivative, or a related security.
                      “Marketplace”                 The same meaning as set out in General By-law No. 1, section 1.1.
                      “Marketplace Member”          The same meaning as set out in General By-law No. 1, section 1.1.
                      “market value”                (i)   For the purposes of the monthly, quarterly, and annual
                                                          reporting for securities, derivatives and precious metals bullion:
                                                          (a) quoted on an active market, the published price quotation
                                                               using:
                                                               (I) for listed securities, the last bid price of a long
                                                                     security and, correspondingly, the last ask price of a
                                                                     short security, as shown on a consolidated pricing list
                                                                     or marketplace quotation sheet as of the close of
                                                                     business on the relevant date or last trading date
                                                                     prior to the relevant date, as the case may be,
                                                               (II) for unlisted investment funds, the net asset value
                                                                     provided by the manager of the fund on the relevant
                                                                     date,
                                                               (III) for all other unlisted securities (including unlisted
                                                                     debt securities) and precious metals bullion, a value
                                                                     determined as reasonable from published market
                                                                     reports or inter-dealer quotation sheets on the
                                                                     relevant date or last trading day prior to the relevant
                                                                     date, or, in the case of debt securities, based on a
                                                                     reasonable yield rate,
                                                               (IV) for money market fixed date repurchases (no
                                                                     borrower call feature), the price determined by
                                                                     applying the current yield for the security to the term
                                                                     of maturity from the repurchase date. This will
                                                                     permit calculation of any profit or loss based on the
                                                                     market conditions at the reporting date,
                                                               (V) for money market open repurchases (no borrower
                                                                     call feature), the price determined as of the reporting
                                                                     date or the date the commitment first becomes
                                                                     open, whichever is the later. The value is to be


Series 1000 | Interpretation and Principles Rules                                                                        Rule 1200
                                                      Investment Dealer and Partially Consolidated Rules

                                                               determined as in paragraph (i)(a)(IV) of this definition
                                                               and the commitment price is to be determined in the
                                                               same manner using the yield stated in the repurchase
                                                               commitment, and
                                                        (VI) for money market repurchases with borrower call
                                                               features, the borrower call price,
                                                        (VII) for listed derivatives, the market value or settlement
                                                               price on the relevant date or last trading day prior to
                                                               the relevant date,
                                                        (VIII) for over-the-counter derivatives, a value determined
                                                               as reasonable by considering:
                                                               (A) the market value or settlement price of the
                                                                     equivalent listed derivative, if available; and
                                                               (B) values from published market reports or inter-
                                                                     dealer quotation sheets
                                                               on the relevant date or last trading day prior to the
                                                               relevant date,
                                                        and after making any adjustments considered by the
                                                        Dealer Member to be necessary to accurately reflect the
                                                        market value,
                                                    (b) where a reliable price cannot be determined:
                                                        (I) the value determined by using a valuation technique
                                                               that includes inputs other than published price
                                                               quotations that are observable for the security,
                                                               derivative or precious metals bullion, either directly
                                                               or indirectly, or
                                                        (II) where no observable market data-related inputs are
                                                               available, the value determined by using
                                                               unobservable inputs and assumptions, or
                                                        (III) where insufficient recent information is available or
                                                               there is a wide range of possible values and position
                                                               cost (defined in subsection 3802(1)) represents the
                                                               best value estimate within that range:
                                                               (A) position cost, and
                                                               (B) where the market value information is being
                                                                     included in a client report or account statement,
                                                                     the Dealer Member must include the following
                                                                     notification or a notification that is substantially
                                                                     similar:
                                                                         “There is no active market for this
                                                                         [security/derivative/ precious metals bullion]
                                                                         so we have estimated its market value.”
                                                    (c) where a value cannot be reliably determined under
                                                        subclauses (i)(a) and (i)(b) of this definition:
                                                        (I) no value shall be reported, and
                                                        (II) where the market value information is being included
                                                               in a client report or account statement, the Dealer
                                                               Member must include the following notification or a
                                                               notification that is substantially similar:
                                                                           “Market value not determinable.”

Series 1000 | Interpretation and Principles Rules                                                                Rule 1200
                                                               Investment Dealer and Partially Consolidated Rules


                                                       (ii) For the purposes of the daily and intra-day reporting for
                                                            securities, derivatives and precious metals bullion:
                                                            (a) that are quoted on an active market, the value determined
                                                                   according to subclause (i)(a) of this definition,
                                                            (b) where a reliable price cannot be determined and:
                                                                   (I) the position has been recently valued in accordance
                                                                         with the Dealer Member’s valuation policies and
                                                                         procedures, the last value calculated for the position,
                                                                         or
                                                                   (II) the position has not been recently valued, the value
                                                                         and, if applicable, disclosure determined according to
                                                                         subclause (i)(b) of this definition,
                                                             (c) where a value cannot be reliably determined under
                                                                 subclauses (ii)(a) and (ii)(b) above, the value and, if
                                                                 applicable, disclosure determined according to subclause
                                                                 (i)(c) of this definition.
                      “Member”                         The same meaning as set out in General By-law No. 1, section 1.1.
                      “Membership”                     Corporation membership.
                      “Monitor”                        A person appointed under section 8209 or 8212 to monitor a
                                                       Regulated Person’s business and affairs and to exercise powers
                                                       granted by a hearing panel.
                      “multiple client order”          Has the same meaning as set out in the Universal Market
                                                       Integrity Rules.
                      “Mutual Fund Dealer Member”      A Member that is registered as a mutual fund dealer in accordance
                                                       with securities law and is not also registered as an investment dealer.
                      “National Hearing Officer”       A person appointed by the Corporation who is responsible for the
                                                       administration of enforcement and other proceedings under the
                                                       Corporation requirements and other employees of the Corporation to
                                                       whom the person delegates the performance of such functions.
                      “non-client accounts” or         Accounts or orders in which the Dealer Member or an Approved
                      “non-client orders”              Person has a direct or indirect interest other than the commission
                                                       charged.
                      “officer”                        A Dealer Member’s chair or vice-chair of the board of directors, chief
                                                       executive officer, president, chief administrative officer, Chief
                                                       Compliance Officer, Chief Financial Officer, chief operating officer,
                                                       vice-president, secretary, any other person designated an officer of a
                                                       Dealer Member by law or similar authority, or any person acting in a
                                                       similar capacity on behalf of a Dealer Member.
                      “order execution only account”    An account which is not subject to a suitability determination (other
                                                        than as required by clauses 3402(3)(i) and 3403(4)(i)) where:
                                                       (i) the client is solely responsible for making all investment
                                                            decisions, and
                                                       (ii) the Dealer Member provides no recommendation to purchase,
                                                            sell, hold or exchange any security, including any class of security
                                                            or security of a class of issuer, or transact in any derivative.
                      “over-the-counter derivative”    Any derivative other than a listed derivative.




Series 1000 | Interpretation and Principles Rules                                                                       Rule 1200
                                                              Investment Dealer and Partially Consolidated Rules


                      “Participant”                    Has the same meaning as set out in the Universal Market
                                                       Integrity Rules.
                      “party”                          A party to a proceeding under the Corporation requirements,
                                                       including Enforcement Staff and Corporation staff.
                      “person”                         An individual, a partnership, a corporation, a government or any of
                                                       its departments or agencies, a trustee, an incorporated or
                                                       unincorporated organization, an incorporated or unincorporated
                                                       syndicate or an individual’s heirs, executors, administrators or other
                                                       legal representatives.
                      “Portfolio Manager”              An individual designated by the Dealer Member and approved by the
                                                       Corporation to provide discretionary portfolio management for
                                                       managed accounts.
                      “President”                      The same meaning as set out in General By-law No. 1, section 1.1.
                      “public member”                  A public member in relation to a hearing committee means:
                                                       (i) a current or retired member of the law society of a province,
                                                            other than Québec, who is in good standing at the law society,
                                                            or
                                                       (ii) in Québec, a current or retired member of the Barreau du
                                                            Québec, who is in good standing at the Barreau.
                      “recognized foreign regulatory   A foreign regulatory organization, including a foreign self-regulatory
                      organization”                    organization, which offers reciprocal treatment to Canadian
                                                       applicants and which has been recognized by the Corporation as
                                                       such.
                      “records”                        Books, records, client files, information and other documentation,
                                                       including electronic documents, related to the Regulated Person’s
                                                       business.
                      “Region”                         The same meaning as set out in General By-law No. 1, section 1.1.
                      “Regional Council”               The same meaning as set out in General By-law No. 1, section 1.1.
                      “Registered Representative”      An individual, approved by the Corporation, to trade, or advise on
                                                       trades, in securities or derivatives with the public in Canada, on the
                                                       Dealer Member’s behalf, including where that individual deals only in
                                                       mutual funds or only with institutional clients.
                      “regulated entity”               The same meaning as set out in Form 1, General Notes and
                                                       Definitions.
                      “Regulated Persons”              The same meaning as set out in General By-law No. 1, section 1.1,
                                                       except, for the purposes of these Rules, current and former Mutual
                                                       Fund Dealer Members and their current and former representatives
                                                       are to be excluded.




Series 1000 | Interpretation and Principles Rules                                                                      Rule 1200
                                                               Investment Dealer and Partially Consolidated Rules


                      “related company”                A sole proprietorship, partnership or corporation that is a Dealer
                                                       Member and is related to another Dealer Member because:
                                                       (i) it, or its Executives, Directors, officers, shareholders or
                                                            employees (individually or collectively) have at least a 20%
                                                            ownership interest in the other Dealer Member, or
                                                       (ii) the other Dealer Member, or its Executives, Directors, officers,
                                                            shareholders or employees (individually or collectively) have at
                                                            least a 20% ownership interest in it,
                                                       where the ownership interest includes an interest as a partner or
                                                       shareholder, either directly or indirectly, or an interest through one
                                                       or more holding companies.
                                                       But if the Board has ordered that two persons are, or are not, related
                                                       companies under the Corporation requirements, that order defines
                                                       their relationship under the Corporation requirements.
                      “remuneration”                   Any benefit or consideration, including goods and service, monetary
                                                       or otherwise that could be provided to or received by a person.
                      “repurchase agreement”           An agreement to sell and repurchase securities.
                      “research report”                Any written or electronic communication for distribution to clients or
                                                       prospective clients containing an analyst’s recommendation about
                                                       the purchase, sale or holding of a security, excluding any government
                                                       debt security or any government guaranteed debt security.
                      “respondent”                     A person who is the subject of a proceeding or settlement under
                                                       Corporation requirements.
                      “reverse repurchase agreement”   An agreement to purchase and resell securities.
                      “retail client”                  A client that is not an institutional client.
                      “risk adjusted capital”          The capital level maintained by a Dealer Member, calculated in
                                                       accordance with the Corporation requirements set out in Form 1.
                      “Rules”                          These Rules made pursuant to General By-law No.1 and any Forms
                                                       prescribed thereunder.
                      “Rules of Procedure”             The rules of practice and procedure under Rule 8400.
                      “safekeeping”                    The holding of securities by a Dealer Member for a client in
                                                       accordance with the requirements set out in Part A of Rule 4400.
                      “sales literature”                Any written or electronic communication for client use which
                                                        contains a recommendation relating to a security or derivative, or
                                                        trading strategy, but does not include:
                                                       (i) any communication that is an advertisement or correspondence,
                                                            or
                                                       (ii) preliminary prospectuses and prospectuses.
                      “sanction”                       A penalty imposed by a hearing panel or a penalty or other measure
                                                       imposed under a settlement agreement.
                      “securities laws”                Any laws about trading, distributing, advising or any other related
                                                       activities in securities or derivatives in Canada enacted by the
                                                       government of Canada or any province or territory in Canada and all
                                                       regulations, rules, orders, judgments and other regulatory directions
                                                       relating to such laws.




Series 1000 | Interpretation and Principles Rules                                                                     Rule 1200
                                                                   Investment Dealer and Partially Consolidated Rules


                      “securities regulatory authority”    Any commission or person in Canada, or any province or territory in
                                                           Canada, authorized to administer securities laws and any person
                                                           approved, recognized or authorized as an SRO by such commission.
                      "securities and derivatives related Any business or activity (whether or not carried on for gain) engaged
                      business"                           in, directly or indirectly, which constitutes trading or advising in
                                                          securities or derivatives for the purposes of securities laws, including
                                                          for greater certainty, offers and sales pursuant to exemptions under
                                                          securities laws.
                      “security”                           A security as defined within the relevant securities law other than a
                                                           derivative.
                      “segregation”                        A practice whereby a Dealer Member holds in trust client securities
                                                           and precious metals bullion that are:
                                                           (i) held free and clear of any charge, lien, claim or encumbrance of
                                                               any kind,
                                                           (ii) ready for delivery to a client on demand, and
                                                           (iii) held separate from the Dealer Member’s own security holdings.
                      “settlement agreement”               A written agreement between Corporation staff and a respondent to
                                                           settle a proceeding or proposed proceeding under Rule 8200.
                      “settlement hearing”                 A hearing relating to a settlement agreement.
                      “shared office premises”             Premises a Dealer Member shares with another regulated Canadian
                                                           financial service entity that is involved in financial activities, such as
                                                           banking, mutual funds, insurance, deposit taking or mortgage
                                                           brokerage activities.
                      “significant area of risk”           A function, process or an activity within a Dealer Member in which a
                                                           failure to mitigate or control its risk could lead to material harm to
                                                           the Dealer Member’s liquidity, solvency, operational capabilities,
                                                           clients, client assets and other client positions.
                      “SRO”                                The same meaning as defined in National Instrument 14-101.
                      “subordinated debt”                  Debt that does not entitle the holder to be paid in priority to any
                                                           senior class of debt.
                      “subsidiary”                         Subsidiary of an entity means:
                                                           (i) an entity it controls,
                                                           (ii) a corporation it controls and one or more corporations
                                                                 controlled by that corporation, or
                                                           (iii) a corporation controlled by two or more corporations it controls,
                                                           and includes a corporation that is a subsidiary of another subsidiary
                                                           of a corporation.
                      “Supervisor”                         An individual given responsibility and authority by a Dealer Member,
                                                           and approved by the Corporation, to manage the activities of the
                                                           Dealer Member or the Dealer Member’s Approved Persons or
                                                           employees to provide reasonable assurance they comply with the
                                                           Corporation requirements and securities laws.
                      “temporary hold”                     means a hold that is placed on the purchase or sale of a security on
                                                           behalf of a client or on the withdrawal or transfer of cash or
                                                           securities from a client’s account.



Series 1000 | Interpretation and Principles Rules                                                                              Rule 1200
                                                                 Investment Dealer and Partially Consolidated Rules


                      “total margin required”             The same meaning as set out in Statement B of Form 1.
                      “trade name”                        A name a Dealer Member or Approved Person uses to conduct
                                                          business and includes a group name under which a Dealer Member
                                                          and its affiliates conduct business.
                      “Trader”                            An individual, approved by the Corporation as a trader, whose
                                                          activity is restricted to trading through a Marketplace Member’s
                                                          trading system, and who may not advise the public.
                      “trading strategy”                  A broad general approach to investments including matters such as
                                                          the use of specific products, leverage, frequency of trading or a
                                                          method of selecting particular investments but does not include
                                                          specific trade or sectoral weighting recommendations.
                      “Ultimate Designated Person”        An individual approved by the Corporation to be responsible for the
                                                          conduct of a designated Dealer Member and the supervision of its
                                                          employees and to perform the functions for an ultimate designated
                                                          person described in the Corporation requirements.
                      “written cash and securities loan   A written cash loan agreement or securities loan agreement, other
                      agreement”                          than an overnight cash loan agreement (as defined in section 4602),
                                                          where the Dealer Member receives or pays cash or, provides or
                                                          receives securities, that contains the minimum provisions described
                                                          in Part B of Rule 4600.

1202. – 1299. Reserved.




Series 1000 | Interpretation and Principles Rules                                                                       Rule 1200
                                                            Investment Dealer and Partially Consolidated Rules


RULE 1300 | EXEMPTIVE POWERS OF THE CORPORATION

1301. Introduction
            (1)     Rule 1300 describes the powers of the Corporation to provide exemptions from Corporation
                    requirements.
1302. Exemptions from the Corporation requirements
            (1)     Unless otherwise prescribed by the Corporation requirements, the Board may exempt a Dealer
                    Member from any Corporation requirement if satisfied that doing so would not be prejudicial to
                    the interests of the public, Dealer Members or their clients. In granting an exemption, the Board
                    may impose any terms or conditions that it considers necessary.
1303. – 1399. Reserved.




Series 1000 | Interpretation and Principles Rules                                                             Rule 1300
                                                                Investment Dealer and Partially Consolidated Rules


RULE 1400 | STANDARDS OF CONDUCT

1401. Introduction
           Rule 1400 sets out the general standards of conduct that apply to Regulated Persons.
1402. Standards of conduct
           (1)     A Regulated Person:
                   (i)     in the transaction of business must observe high standards of ethics and conduct and must
                           act openly and fairly and in accordance with just and equitable principles of trade, and
                   (ii)    must not engage in any business conduct that is unbecoming or detrimental to the public
                           interest.
           (2)     Without limiting the generality of the foregoing, any business conduct that:
                   (i)     is negligent,
                   (ii)    fails to comply with a legal, regulatory, contractual or other obligation, including the rules,
                           requirements, and policies of a Regulated Person,
                   (iii)   displays an unreasonable departure from standards that are expected to be observed by a
                           Regulated Person, or
                   (iv)    is likely to diminish investor confidence in the integrity of securities or derivatives markets,
                   may be conduct that contravenes one or more of the standards set forth in subsection 1402(1).
1403. Applicability
           (1)     For purposes of Corporation requirements:
                   (i)     Dealer Members are responsible for all acts and omissions of their employees, partners,
                           Directors and officers, and
                   (ii)    non-Dealer Member users and subscribers to a Marketplace for which the Corporation is the
                           regulation services provider are responsible for all acts and omissions of their employees,
                           partners, directors, and officers.
           (2)     In addition to complying with all Corporation requirements:
                   (i)     an Approved Person must avoid any act or omission that would cause their Dealer Member
                           to violate any Corporation requirements, and
                   (ii)    an employee, partner, director or officer of a non-Dealer Member user or subscriber of a
                           Marketplace for which the Corporation is the regulation services provider must avoid any
                           act or omission that would cause the user or subscriber to violate any Corporation
                           requirements.
           (3)     For purposes of section 1402, the obligation of Regulated Persons that are non-Dealer Member
                   users or subscribers of a Marketplace for which the Corporation is the regulation services provider
                   is limited to the obligation to transact business openly and fairly when trading on a Marketplace or
                   otherwise dealing in securities or derivatives that are eligible to be traded on a Marketplace.




Series 1000 | Interpretation and Principles Rules                                                                    Rule 1400
                                                            Investment Dealer and Partially Consolidated Rules

1404. Policies and procedures
           (1)     A Dealer Member must establish, maintain and apply written policies and procedures regarding
                   the conduct of its business activities and operations.
           (2)     A Dealer Member must establish, maintain and apply written policies and procedures that
                   establish a system of controls and supervision sufficient to provide reasonable assurance the
                   Dealer Member, its employees and Approved Persons comply with Corporation requirements and
                   securities laws. A Dealer Member may establish more stringent policies and procedures than those
                   needed to comply with such requirements.
           (3)     Guidelines and best practices set out in Corporation guidance are generally intended to present
                   acceptable methods that can be used to comply with specific Corporation requirements. Unless
                   otherwise indicated, Dealer Members may use alternate methods, provided that those methods
                   demonstrably achieve the overall objective of the Corporation requirements.
           (4)     The Corporation may require a Dealer Member to adopt additional or different policies and
                   procedures if the existing policies and procedures are insufficient to comply with Corporation
                   requirements.
1405. Evidence of compliance with the Corporation requirements
           (1)     A Dealer Member must establish a compliance system for monitoring compliance with Corporation
                   requirements and securities laws. The compliance monitoring systems must specifically address
                   preventing and detecting violations and include procedures for reporting the results of compliance
                   monitoring to management.
           (2)     A Dealer Member must keep all records and evidence of its compliance with Corporation
                   requirements that it produces, including supervisory reviews, reports and queries on compliance.
           (3)     The Corporation may require a Dealer Member to provide it with evidence, satisfactory to the
                   Corporation, of the Dealer Member’s compliance with Corporation requirements.
1406. Compliance with all applicable laws
           (1)     A Dealer Member must comply with all relevant Corporation requirements, securities laws and
                   applicable laws that are applicable to the Dealer Member’s activities.
           (2)     Where there is an inconsistency between any Corporation requirements, securities laws and
                   applicable laws that apply to the Dealer Member’s activities, compliance with the most stringent
                   of the Corporation requirements, securities laws or applicable laws is required.
1407. – 1499. Reserved.




Series 1000 | Interpretation and Principles Rules                                                              Rule 1400
                                                              Investment Dealer and Partially Consolidated Rules


RULE 1500 | MANAGING SIGNIFICANT AREAS OF RISK

1501. Introduction
           (1)     As a key element of the Corporation’s regulatory framework, the Corporation expects that, for
                   every significant area of risk within a Dealer Member, an appropriate Executive be responsible for
                   managing such area of risk.
1502. Responsibility for significant areas of risk
           (1)     For each significant area of risk within a Dealer Member, the Dealer Member must assign
                   responsibility to an appropriate Executive. For certain significant areas of risk, the Corporation has
                   assigned the responsibility to a specific Executive as set out in the Corporation requirements.
           (2)     The Dealer Member must document and maintain a list of Executives and the significant areas of
                   risk each Executive is responsible for managing.
           (3)     Executives are responsible for the review and approval of any policies and procedures relating to
                   their significant area of risk.
1503. – 1999. Reserved.




Series 1000 | Interpretation and Principles Rules                                                                 Rule 1500
                                                                         Investment Dealer and Partially Consolidated Rules


SERIES 2000 | DEALER MEMBER ORGANIZATION AND INDIVIDUAL APPROVAL RULES

RULE 2100 | OWNERSHIP OF A DEALER MEMBER’S SECURITIES

2101. Introduction
          (1)     Rule 2100 covers the issuance of securities by a Dealer Member or its holding company and
                  changes in ownership.
          (2)     A Dealer Member must conduct its business with integrity and must maintain adequate financial
                  resources. The Corporation has a responsibility to ensure that persons who have an interest in a
                  Dealer Member are fit and proper. The Corporation also needs to assess whether the obligations
                  incurred by a Dealer Member under the terms of securities it issues pose a risk to the Dealer
                  Member.
2102. Definitions
          (1)     The following terms have the meaning set out below when used in sections 2103 through 2117:
                    “industry investor”           Any of the following that hold a beneficial ownership interest in a Dealer
                                                  Member or its holding company:
                                                 (i)     a full-time officer or employee of the Dealer Member, or of a related
                                                         company or affiliate of the Dealer Member, that conducts Dealer Member
                                                         related activities.
                                                 (ii)    a spouse of an individual referred to in clause (i) of this definition,
                                                 (iii)   an investment corporation, if:
                                                         (a) all of the individuals referred to in clause (i) of this definition
                                                             collectively hold the majority of each class of voting securities of the
                                                             investment corporation, or
                                                         (b) all of the beneficial owners of all other equity securities of the
                                                             investment corporation are:
                                                             (I) individuals referred to in clauses (i) or (ii) of this definition,
                                                             (II) children of individuals referred to in clauses (i) and (ii) of this
                                                                  definition, or
                                                             (III) individuals and organizations that separately qualify as industry
                                                                   investors of a Dealer Member or its holding company,
                                                 (iv)    a family trust established and maintained for the benefit of individuals
                                                         referred to in clauses (i) and (ii) of this definition or their children, if:
                                                         (a) all of the individuals referred to in clauses (i) or (ii) this definition
                                                             collectively have full direction and control of the trust, including its
                                                             investment portfolio and the exercise of voting and other rights of the
                                                             trust’s investments, and
                                                         (b) all of the trust’s beneficiaries are:
                                                             (I) individuals referred to in clauses (i) or (ii) of this definition,




Series 2000 | Dealer Member Organization and Individual Approval Rules                                                                Rule 2100
                                                                         Investment Dealer and Partially Consolidated Rules

                                                             (II) children of individuals referred to in clauses (i) and (ii) of this
                                                                  definition, or
                                                             (III) individuals and organizations that separately qualify as industry
                                                                   investors of the Dealer Member or its holding company,
                                                 (v)     a registered retirement savings plan, established under the Income Tax
                                                         Act (Canada), of an individual referred to in clauses (i) or (ii) of this
                                                         definition if that individual has control of its investment policy and has the
                                                         only beneficial ownership interest in the registered savings plan,
                                                 (vi)   the Dealer Member’s pension fund if the investment decisions relating to
                                                        that pension fund are made by the individuals referred to in clause (i) of
                                                        this definition,
                                                 (vii) an estate of an individual referred to in clauses (i) or (ii) of this definition
                                                       for one year after the death of the individual, or such longer period
                                                       allowed by the Corporation, or
                                                 (viii) any individual or organization, for a period of 90 days, or such longer
                                                        period as the Corporation may permit, after:
                                                        (a) the date the individual is no longer an employee of the Dealer
                                                            Member, its related company or affiliate, in the case of an individual
                                                            that previously qualified as an industry investor under clause (i) of this
                                                            definition, or
                                                        (b) the person through whom the individual or organization previously
                                                            qualified as an industry investor is no longer an employee of the
                                                            Dealer Member, its related company or affiliate, in the case of
                                                            individuals and organizations that previously qualified as an industry
                                                            investor under clauses (ii) through (v) of this definition.
                                                  An industry investor must be approved by the board of directors of the Dealer
                                                  Member or its holding company. The industry investor must also be approved
                                                  by the Corporation if the industry investor has a significant equity interest in
                                                  the Dealer Member or its holding company.
                    “qualified                    For a distribution of a Dealer Member’s securities or its holding company’s
                    independent                   securities, it means another Dealer Member:
                    underwriter”                 (i)   which has been in the securities business for no less than the five years
                                                       immediately preceding the date that the prospectus (or other equivalent
                                                       document) is filed,
                                                 (ii) where, as of the distribution date, the majority of its board of directors (if a
                                                       corporation) or the majority of its general partners (if a partnership), have
                                                       been in the securities business for no less than the five years immediately
                                                       preceding the distribution date,
                                                 (iii) which has underwritten public offerings of securities for no less than the
                                                       five years immediately preceding the distribution date, and
                                                 (iv) which is not an associate or affiliate of the issuing entity.
                    “significant equity          (i)    A holding of 10% or more of the voting securities of a Dealer Member or its
                    interest”                           holding company,



Series 2000 | Dealer Member Organization and Individual Approval Rules                                                              Rule 2100
                                                                         Investment Dealer and Partially Consolidated Rules

                                                 (ii)  a holding of 10% or more of the outstanding participating securities of a
                                                       Dealer Member or its holding company, or
                                                 (iii) an interest of 10% or more of the total equity of the Dealer Member.

2103. Dealer Members must have Corporation approval to issue subordinated debt
          (1)     A Dealer Member or its holding company must obtain the Corporation’s approval in writing
                  before issuing a security representing subordinated debt.
          (2)     A Dealer Member or its holding company must obtain the Corporation’s approval in writing
                  before signing an agreement to issue subordinated debt in the future.
2104. Repayments and additional subordinated debt
          (1)     A Dealer Member must obtain the Corporation’s approval in writing before it can issue any
                  additional securities representing subordinated debt or repay any subordinated debt.
2105. Agreements with the Corporation
          (1)     Where the Corporation is a party to a subordinated debt agreement or other debt agreement
                  with the Dealer Member, the Dealer Member must comply with the agreement in making any
                  repayments of the debt subject to the agreement.
2106. Corporation notification of changes of ownership
          (1)     A Dealer Member must notify the Corporation in writing and file the form specified by the
                  Corporation at least 20 days before issuing or transferring its securities or its holding company’s
                  securities, including any legal or beneficial ownership interest in either.
          (2)     Subsection 2106(1) does not apply to a class of securities if:
                  (i)     there is public ownership of those securities as a result of a distribution made in compliance
                          with securities laws, and
                  (ii)    the purchase or transfer will not result in an acquirer of the securities owning a significant
                          equity interest.
2107. Ownership of another Dealer Member
          (1)     An industry investor is prohibited from purchasing the securities of a Dealer Member or its
                  holding company, other than in the Dealer Member or holding company in which the industry
                  investor is approved, except if:
                  (i)     there is public ownership of the class of securities as a result of a distribution made in
                          compliance with securities laws and the industry investor will not hold a significant
                          equity interest,
                  (ii)    the Dealer Member is a related company or an affiliate of the Dealer Member in which the
                          industry investor was approved to invest, or
                  (iii)   the following apply:
                           (a)     the investment does not exceed 10% of any class of the issued equity or voting
                                   shares,
                           (b)     the industry investor notified the Corporation of the investment,



Series 2000 | Dealer Member Organization and Individual Approval Rules                                                       Rule 2100
                                                                         Investment Dealer and Partially Consolidated Rules

                           (c)     where the industry investor is regulated by another securities regulatory authority,
                                   the industry investor has provided the Corporation with evidence that the securities
                                   regulatory authority does not object to the relationship, and
                           (d)     the Dealer Member that the industry investor was approved to invest in does not
                                   object to the investment.
2108. Ownership of a significant equity interest and ownership of assets
          (1)     For the purpose of section 2108, “all or a substantial part of the assets” of a registered firm
                  includes, among other things, a registered firm’s book of business, business line or division of
                  the firm.
          (2)     A Dealer Member must file the form specified by the Corporation and obtain Corporation
                  approval before allowing a person, alone or together with associates and affiliates, to directly or
                  indirectly, own or hold a beneficial ownership interest in:
                  (i)     a significant equity interest in the Dealer Member, or
                  (ii)    special warrants or other securities that are convertible into a significant equity interest in
                          the Dealer Member.
          (3)     The written request for approval under subsection 2108(2) must be delivered to the Corporation
                  at least 30 days before the proposed ownership change and must include all relevant facts
                  regarding the ownership change sufficient to enable the Corporation to determine if the
                  ownership change is:
                  (i)     likely to give rise to a conflict of interest,
                  (ii)    likely to hinder the Dealer Member in complying with Corporation requirements or
                          securities laws,
                  (iii)   inconsistent with an adequate level of investor protection, or
                  (iv)    otherwise prejudicial to the public interest.
          (4)     Subsection 2108(2) does not apply to the legal representatives of a deceased person who had
                  been approved by the Corporation as the owner of a significant equity interest. The legal
                  representatives can continue as a registered holder or to hold a significant equity interest for a
                  period as permitted by the Corporation.
          (5)     A Dealer Member must file a written request for approval from the Corporation at least 30 days
                  before the proposed acquisition if it proposes to acquire all or a substantial part of the assets of a
                  registered firm, or if all or a substantial part of the Dealer Member assets are to be acquired, and
                  must include all relevant facts regarding the proposed acquisition sufficient to enable the
                  Corporation to determine if the acquisition is:
                  (i)     likely to give rise to a conflict of interest,
                  (ii)    likely to hinder the Dealer Member in complying with Corporation requirements or
                          securities laws,
                  (iii)   inconsistent with an adequate level of investor protection, or
                  (iv)    otherwise prejudicial to the public interest.
          (6)     A Dealer Member must not complete a proposed acquisition requiring notice under subsection
                  2108(5) until the Corporation approves the proposed acquisition.


Series 2000 | Dealer Member Organization and Individual Approval Rules                                              Rule 2100
                                                                         Investment Dealer and Partially Consolidated Rules

          (7)     Dealer Members acquiring securities or assets of another registered firm for a client in nominee
                  name do not need to provide notice under Rule 2100.
2109. A Dealer Member’s ownership of another Dealer Member
          (1)     A Dealer Member or its holding company must obtain approval from the Corporation before
                  purchasing, directly or indirectly, any securities of another Dealer Member or its holding
                  company. However, this does not apply if the ownership is a trading position held in the ordinary
                  course of the securities business.
2110. Public ownership
          (1)     A Dealer Member must obtain approval from the Corporation before allowing public ownership of
                  the Dealer Member’s securities or of its holding company’s securities.
          (2)     When the Corporation considers an application for approval:
                  (i)     the Dealer Member must satisfy the Corporation that it complies with, and will continue to
                          meet, Corporation requirements,
                  (ii)    the Corporation may require the Dealer Member to provide a legal opinion and any other
                          information it considers necessary, and
                  (iii)   the Corporation may impose conditions on and require undertakings from any person it
                          considers necessary to provide reasonable assurance of continuing compliance with
                          Corporation requirements.
          (3)     Regardless of its own governing corporate statute, a
                  (i)     Dealer Member, or
                  (ii)    holding company of a Dealer Member,
                  that is a reporting issuer or equivalent in any Canadian jurisdiction must set up and maintain an
                  audit committee as the Canada Business Corporations Act requires.
          (4)     The Corporation may exempt a Dealer Member or its holding company from subsection 2110(3).
2111. Public distribution of a Dealer Member’s securities
          (1)     A Dealer Member or its holding company making a public distribution of its securities must
                  include in the prospectus, or equivalent document, summaries of at least two separate valuations
                  of its securities, if:
                  (i)     the Dealer Member is underwriting more than 25% of the distribution itself, or
                  (ii)    the distribution is offered on an agency or best efforts basis.
          (2)     Qualified independent underwriters or chartered accountants must prepare the valuations and
                  summaries. A qualified independent underwriter participating in the distribution may prepare a
                  valuation.
          (3)     Subsection 2111(1) does not apply if securities with identical attributes have been trading on an
                  exchange in Canada for at least six months before the new distribution begins.




Series 2000 | Dealer Member Organization and Individual Approval Rules                                              Rule 2100
                                                                         Investment Dealer and Partially Consolidated Rules

2112. Take-over bids or amalgamations
          (1)     A Dealer Member or its holding company must obtain at least two separate valuations of its
                  securities if they are distributed through a transaction such as a take-over bid or amalgamation
                  resulting in a publicly traded market for the securities.
          (2)     Qualified independent underwriters or chartered accountants must prepare the valuations and
                  summaries. A qualified independent underwriter participating in the distribution may prepare the
                  valuations and summaries.
          (3)     Subsection 2112(1) does not apply if:
                  (i)     securities with identical attributes have been trading on an exchange in Canada for at least
                          six months before the transaction, or
                  (ii)    the circumstances of the transaction, such as the terms of the transaction, were arrived at
                          through arm’s length negotiations and the Corporation, determines that valuations are not
                          required.
2113. Secondary distribution of securities
          (1)     The requirements of sections 2111 and 2112 apply, with necessary changes, to a secondary
                  distribution of securities of a Dealer Member or its holding company if the securities are
                  distributed from a control position.
2114. Soliciting trades in a Dealer Member’s securities
          (1)     A Dealer Member may solicit trades in its own securities or those of its holding company when:
                  (i)     making a distribution of its own securities under a prospectus in compliance with
                          Corporation requirements and securities laws, or
                  (ii)    making a private placement of its own securities under securities laws.
          (2)     A Dealer Member must not solicit trades in its own securities or its holding company in the
                  secondary market.
          (3)     A Dealer Member may accept unsolicited orders for its own securities or those of its holding
                  company.
2115. Dealer Member’s securities in client accounts
          (1)     A Dealer Member may accept its own securities or those of its holding company as security for a
                  margin account subject to Corporation requirements including, but not limited to, Schedule 9 of
                  Form 1.
          (2)     A Dealer Member must not allow a discretionary account to hold the Dealer Member’s securities
                  or those of its holding company.
2116. Research reports
          (1)     A Dealer Member must not issue research reports or opinion letters on its own securities or those
                  of its holding company.
2117. Corporation approvals
          (1)     A Dealer Member must apply to Corporation to obtain an approval required under Rule 2100.
          (2)     The applicant must pay the prescribed fee.

Series 2000 | Dealer Member Organization and Individual Approval Rules                                              Rule 2100
                                                                         Investment Dealer and Partially Consolidated Rules

          (3)     Within 10 days after any event that gives rise to a change in the information submitted pursuant
                  to an application for approval, including any bankruptcy or criminal proceedings, the applicant
                  and the Dealer Member or holding company involved must inform the Corporation of the change
                  in the applicant’s information.
          (4)     The Corporation may refuse an application for approval or may withdraw any approval it has
                  granted.
2118. - 2199. Reserved.




Series 2000 | Dealer Member Organization and Individual Approval Rules                                              Rule 2100
                                                                         Investment Dealer and Partially Consolidated Rules

RULE 2200 | DEALER MEMBER ORGANIZATION

2201. Introduction
         (1)     A Dealer Member must take reasonable care to organize and manage its business responsibly and
                 effectively. A Dealer Member’s business must be organized to enable adequate supervision of all
                 of its activities and cannot be organized to avoid Corporation requirements.
         (2)     Rule 2200 is divided into the following parts:
                 Part A – Dealer Member Structure
                             Part A.1 – Business locations
                                          [section 2202]
                             Part A.2 – Holding companies, related companies and order execution only service
                                        providers
                                          [sections 2205 through 2207]
                             Part A.3 – Non-securities or non-derivatives business and shared premises
                                          [sections 2215 and 2216]
                 Part B – Dealer Member Membership Changes
                             [sections 2220 through 2228]
                 Part C – Notification Requirements
                             [sections 2245 through 2248]
                 Part D – Branch Offices of Dealer Members
                             [sections 2265 through 2268]
                 Part E – Trade Names and Disclosures
                             [sections 2280 through 2285]

PART A – DEALER MEMBER STRUCTURE

PART A.1 - BUSINESS LOCATIONS
2202. Business locations
         (1)     Under sub-clause 2803(2)(i)(g), a Dealer Member must notify the Corporation of the opening or
                 closing of a business location.
2203. – 2204. Reserved.

PART A.2 - HOLDING COMPANIES, RELATED COMPANIES AND ORDER EXECUTION ONLY SERVICE PROVIDERS
2205. Holding companies
         (1)     A Dealer Member must ensure that all its holding companies carrying on business in Canada are
                 legally bound to comply with Corporation requirements applicable to holding companies.
         (2)     A Dealer Member’s holding company may be another Dealer Member’s holding company if:



Series 2000 | Dealer Member Organization and Individual Approval Rules                                              Rule 2200
                                                                         Investment Dealer and Partially Consolidated Rules

                  (i)     the holding company owns all of the voting securities and participating securities of an
                          Dealer Member, or
                  (ii)    the Dealer Member obtains Corporation approval to become the holding company of a
                          second Dealer Member.
2206. Related companies
         (1)     A Dealer Member, or an employee, Approved Person, or investor of a Dealer Member, must
                 obtain Corporation approval before it sets up, or acquires any interest in, a related company or
                 associate.
         (2)     A Dealer Member must obtain Corporation approval before creating a wholly owned subsidiary
                 whose principal business is a securities broker, dealer or adviser.
         (3)     A Dealer Member must be responsible for and guarantee its related companies’ obligations to
                 clients, and each of its related companies must be responsible for and guarantee the Dealer
                 Member’s obligations to its clients, as follows:
                 (i)     a Dealer Member that holds an interest in a related company must guarantee an amount
                         equal to 100% of the Dealer Member’s financial statement capital,
                 (ii)    a Dealer Member that holds an interest in a related company must have the related
                         company guarantee an amount equal to the Dealer Member’s percentage ownership
                         multiplied by the related company’s financial statement capital, and
                 (iii)   where two related companies are related because the same person has an ownership
                         interest of at least 20% in each of them, the related companies must guarantee each other
                         for an amount equal to that person’s ownership percentage multiplied by the company’s
                         financial statement capital.
         (4)     A Dealer Member, and each of the Dealer Member’s related companies that are required to
                 guarantee an amount under subsection 2206(3), must sign the current Corporation guarantee
                 form.
         (5)     The Board may exempt a Dealer Member from subsection 2206(3), or may decide that a
                 guarantee for a greater amount is required.
2207. Approval as an order execution only account services provider
         (1)     The Corporation may approve a Dealer Member or a business unit of a Dealer Member to be an
                 order execution only account service provider if the Dealer Member’s only business is an order
                 execution only account service provider or it provides that service in a separate business unit.
         (2)     A Dealer Member that is offering order execution only account services must comply with all
                 Corporation requirements other than those for which compliance is specifically exempted.
         (3)     A Dealer Member’s policies and procedures must specifically address the operation of its order
                 execution only account services.
         (4)     If operating as a separate business unit within a Dealer Member, an order execution only account
                 services provider must have separate letterhead, accounts and account documentation, and its
                 Registered Representatives and Investment Representatives may not work for any other business
                 unit within the Dealer Member.

Series 2000 | Dealer Member Organization and Individual Approval Rules                                              Rule 2200
                                                                         Investment Dealer and Partially Consolidated Rules

         (5)     A Dealer Member must not compensate employees by giving them trade commissions for
                 transactions executed in order execution only accounts.
2208. – 2214. Reserved.

PART A.3 - NON-SECURITIES OR NON-DERIVATIVES BUSINESS AND SHARED PREMISES
2215. Business other than securities or derivatives
          (1)     A Dealer Member must obtain Corporation approval before carrying on any business other than
                  Dealer Member related activities.
          (2)     A Dealer Member or a Dealer Member’s holding company may, without Corporation approval,
                  own an interest in a corporation (other than the Dealer Member) that carries on non-securities or
                  non-derivatives business if:
                 (i)     the Dealer Member is not responsible for any of that corporation’s liabilities, and
                 (ii)    the Dealer Member and its holding company give the Corporation notice before acquiring
                         an interest in the non-securities or non-derivatives corporation.
2216. Shared office premises
         (1)     For the purposes of section 2216, a “financial services entity” means an entity regulated by a
                 securities regulatory authority or by another Canadian financial services regulatory regime such
                 as banking, mutual funds, insurance, deposit-taking, or mortgage brokerage activities.
         (2)     A Dealer Member may share premises with another financial services entity, whether or not they
                 are related companies or affiliate companies, in accordance with section 2216. This section
                 applies to Dealer Members dealing with retail clients.
         (3)     A Dealer Member must ensure that clients clearly understand which legal entity they are dealing
                 with.
         (4)     A Dealer Member’s policies and procedures must specifically address:
                 (i)     supervision of shared office premises,
                 (ii)    representative compliance with Corporation requirements, and
                 (iii)   that clients clearly understand which entity they are dealing with.
         (5)     A Dealer Member must have:
                 (i)     adequate supervisory resources to carry out its supervisory procedures,
                 (ii)    a system for communicating Corporation requirements to representatives at the shared
                         office premises, and
                 (iii)   a process that provides reasonable assurance representatives understand and comply with
                         Corporation requirements.
         (6)     A Dealer Member’s shared office premises must be laid out and operated in a manner that
                 ensures the control and confidentiality of client information and client records by ensuring that
                 client records and account process areas are effectively controlled and physically secure.
         (7)     A Dealer Member must have appropriate signs and disclosure which differentiates the entities
                 sharing the premises.


Series 2000 | Dealer Member Organization and Individual Approval Rules                                              Rule 2200
                                                                         Investment Dealer and Partially Consolidated Rules

         (8)     The legal names under which the Dealer Member and each of the other financial services entities
                 operate must be clearly displayed in a prominent location, such as the office entrance door or
                 reception area.
         (9)     The logo and brochures required to be used by the investor protection fund in which they are a
                 member must be displayed in a manner that makes it clear that the logo and brochures are
                 applicable only to the Dealer Member and not to any other financial services entity.
         (10) When doing business in shared office premises, a Dealer Member must comply with Part E of Rule
              2200.
         (11) A Dealer Member must keep client records separate from the records of another financial services
              entity as follows:
                 (i)     the financial services entity must not have access to the client’s hard copy records, and
                 (ii)    electronic records must have separate passwords or another similar control to ensure the
                         financial services entity has no access to the electronic client records of the Dealer Member.
         (12) When a Dealer Member, operating in a shared office premises opens an account, the Dealer
              Member must obtain the client’s specific acknowledgement of a written disclosure statement:
                 (i)     outlining the relationship between the Dealer Member and the financial services entity
                         sharing the premises, and
                 (ii)    stating that the entities are separate.
         (13) A Dealer Member must keep client information confidential and can only share the information
              with other financial services entities in the shared office premises if:
                 (i)     the client has consented to the disclosure of confidential information in compliance with
                         applicable federal, provincial, and territorial privacy legislation and regulations, and
                 (ii)    the client has consented to the disclosure of client information through a specific
                         confirmation such as a signature or initials at a designated place. A Dealer Member must
                         not obtain a client’s consent through a negative consent option.
         (14) An employee who works for both the Dealer Member and another financial services entity must
              not disclose client information from one organization to the other unless performing a relevant
              service that the client has specifically consented to and the client has consented to the disclosure
              of the client information.
         (15) Non-registered personnel employed by the Dealer Member or representatives of the financial
              services entity may not provide the following services on behalf of the Dealer Member:
                 (i)      opening accounts,
                 (ii)     distributing or receiving order forms for securities or derivatives transactions,
                 (iii)    assisting clients to complete order forms for securities or derivatives transactions,
                 (iv)     giving recommendations or any advice on any activity,
                 (v)      completing know-your-client information on an account application, other than
                          biographical information, and
                 (vi)     soliciting securities or derivatives transactions.


Series 2000 | Dealer Member Organization and Individual Approval Rules                                              Rule 2200
                                                                         Investment Dealer and Partially Consolidated Rules

         (16) Non-registered personnel employed by the Dealer Member or representatives of the financial
              services entity may provide the following services on behalf of the Dealer Member:
                 (i)      advertising the Dealer Member’s services and products,
                 (ii)     delivering or receiving clients’ securities,
                 (iii)    arranging client appointments or informing of deficiencies on completed forms,
                 (iv)     providing the status, balances, and holdings of client accounts,
                 (v)      providing quotes and other market information,
                 (vi)     contacting the public, inviting the public to seminars, and forwarding non-securities
                          information,
                 (vii)    distributing account applications, subject to subsection 2216(17), and
                 (viii) receiving completed account applications to forward to the Dealer Member for approval.
         (17) At the shared office premises, a manager, assistant manager or credit officer of the financial
              services entity who has a high degree of knowledge about the client’s financial affairs may help
              the client to complete the account application, if:
                 (i)      no Approved Person is available,
                 (ii)     the client’s Registered Representative, Portfolio Manager or Associate Portfolio Manager
                          complies with Corporation requirements relating to know-your-client and suitability
                          determination by reviewing the account application with the client before any trade is
                          conducted or a recommendation is made to a client, and
                 (iii)    a Supervisor has approved the account application before any trade is conducted for a
                          client.
         (18) A mutual fund sales person may only accept orders for accounts at the dealer which they are
              registered with and may not:
                  (i)     offer, or advise clients on, equities or other transactions for which specific proficiency is
                          required, or
                  (ii)    communicate those client orders to a qualified person.
2217. – 2219. Reserved.

PART B - DEALER MEMBER MEMBERSHIP CHANGES
2220. Introduction
         (1)     Part B of Rule 2200 sets out how the Corporation deals with changes to the Membership of Dealer
                 Members.
2221. Notice of intention to resign
         (1)     If a Dealer Member intends to resign, it must notify the Corporation in writing of its intention by
                 filing a letter of resignation. The Corporation will issue a Notice advising of the Dealer Member’s
                 intention to resign within one week of receiving a Dealer Member’s intent to resign.
2222. Letter of resignation and supporting documents
         (1)     A resigning Dealer Member must state its reasons for resigning in its resignation letter and file the
                 following supporting documents with the Corporation:

Series 2000 | Dealer Member Organization and Individual Approval Rules                                              Rule 2200
                                                                         Investment Dealer and Partially Consolidated Rules

                 (i)     audited financial statements indicating the Dealer Member has liquid assets sufficient to
                         meet its outstanding liabilities other than subordinated loans, and
                 (ii)    a report from the Dealer Member’s auditor indicating that all client accounts and assets
                         have been transferred to another Dealer Member or returned to the clients.
2223. Acquisition and resignation
         (1)     If all or a substantial part of the business and assets of a resigning Dealer Member is acquired by
                 another Dealer Member, the resigning Dealer Member must provide the Corporation with:
                 (i)     either, an undertaking from the acquiring Dealer Member accepting responsibility for all
                         outstanding liabilities of the resigning Dealer Member, or the documents required under
                         section 2222, and
                 (ii)    pro forma financial statements of the acquiring Dealer Member showing compliance with
                         Corporation requirements relating to capital requirements.
2224. Amalgamation of Dealer Members
         (1)     If two or more Dealer Members are amalgamated, the Dealer Members not continuing due to the
                 amalgamation must surrender their membership. The continuing Dealer Member must provide
                 the Corporation with:
                 (i)     an undertaking that it accepts responsibility for all liabilities of the Dealer Members that are
                         amalgamating, and
                 (ii)    pro forma financial statements of the continuing Dealer Member showing compliance with
                         Corporation requirements relating to capital requirements.
2225. Amalgamation with a non-Dealer Member
         (1)     A Dealer Member may amalgamate with a non-Dealer Member if the continuing Dealer Member
                 provides the Corporation with:
                 (i)     information, satisfactory to the Corporation, confirming that the continuing Dealer Member
                         will have policies and procedures sufficient to carry on its business and comply with
                         Corporation requirements, and
                 (ii)    pro forma financial statements of the continuing Dealer Member showing compliance with
                         Corporation requirements relating to capital requirements.
2226. Effective date of resignation
         (1)     Resignation of a Dealer Member is effective on the date following the day on which the following
                 conditions have all been satisfied:
                 (i)     the Corporation has received the documents required to support the resignation,
                 (ii)    the Corporation has received payment of any amount owed to it,
                 (iii)   the Corporation has confirmed that no complaints or disciplinary actions are outstanding
                         that the Corporation, in its sole discretion, determines must be resolved prior to permitting
                         the Dealer Member to resign, and
                 (iv)    the Board has approved the Dealer Member’s resignation.




Series 2000 | Dealer Member Organization and Individual Approval Rules                                              Rule 2200
                                                                         Investment Dealer and Partially Consolidated Rules

         (2)     Notwithstanding the above, and without limiting the discretion that the Board may have to
                 exempt a Dealer Member from any Corporation requirement, where circumstances warrant, the
                 Board may exercise discretion to postpone the effective date of a Dealer Member’s resignation.
         (3)     The Corporation will issue a notice within one week of the effective date of a Dealer Member’s
                 resignation advising of the effective date of the Dealer Member’s resignation.
2227. Payment of Corporation fees
         (1)     A resigning, suspended, terminated or surrendering Dealer Member must make full payment of
                 its annual membership fees for the entire fiscal year in which its resignation, suspension,
                 termination or surrender becomes effective, subject to the exception set out in subsection
                 2227(2).
         (2)     A resigning, suspended or terminated Dealer Member may make payment of its membership fees
                 until the end of the fiscal quarter in which the following conditions have been met:
                 (i)     the Dealer Member has transferred all customer accounts to another Dealer Member,
                 (ii)    the Dealer Member has no remaining Approved Persons other than shareholders, the
                         Ultimate Designated Person, the Chief Compliance Officer and the Chief Financial Officer,
                         and
                 (iii)   in the case of a resigning Dealer Member, the Dealer Member has provided written notice
                         of its resignation to the Corporation.
2228. Inactive Dealer Members
         (1)     A Dealer Member may apply to the Board to have its membership status temporarily changed to
                 inactive. Dealer Members must file their applications in writing and must include reasons for the
                 requested change.
         (2)     The Board must impose a time limit and may impose conditions on a Dealer Member’s inactive
                 status.
         (3)     When a Dealer Member’s status changes to inactive, the Corporation must publish a notice
                 indicating so.
         (4)     A Dealer Member with inactive status may apply in writing to the Board for an extension to the
                 time period of its inactive status if:
                 (i)     the written application is made at least 30 days before the Dealer Member’s inactive status
                         expires, and
                 (ii)    the inactive status period has not been extended previously.
         (5)     When a Dealer Member’s inactive status or the extension to the period of time established by the
                 Board for inactive status expires, the Dealer Member’s status will automatically revert to that of a
                 Dealer Member.
2229. – 2244. Reserved.




Series 2000 | Dealer Member Organization and Individual Approval Rules                                              Rule 2200
                                                                         Investment Dealer and Partially Consolidated Rules

PART C - NOTIFICATION REQUIREMENTS
2245. Introduction
         (1)      The Corporation may review proposed changes in a Dealer Member’s business, listed in section
                  2246, to ensure:
                  (i)     the Dealer Member is adequately prepared to make the change without unduly impacting
                          its clients,
                  (ii)    the change is carried in accordance with Corporation requirements, and
         (iii)   the change is in the public interest.
2246. Dealer Member’s notice of changes to the Corporation
         (1)     A Dealer Member must notify the Corporation in writing a minimum of 20 days before:
                 (i)     changing its name,
                 (ii)    changing its constitution in a way that affects voting rights,
                 (iii)   taking any steps to dissolve, wind up, surrender its charter, liquidate or dispose of all or
                         substantially all its assets, or
                 (iv)    altering its capital structure including, allotting, issuing, repurchasing, redeeming,
                         canceling, subdividing or consolidating of any shares in its capital.
         (2)      A Dealer Member must notify the Corporation in writing before making any material change to
                  its business activities.
         (3)     A Dealer Member must notify in writing and receive written approval from the Corporation
                 before:
                 (i)      offering retail clients any highly-leveraged securities or derivatives, or
                 (ii)    offering retail clients previously approved highly-leveraged securities or derivatives that are
                         to be based on a new underlying interest.
2247. Notice of review
         (1)     A Dealer Member must not make any of the changes listed in subsection 2246(1) if, within the 20-
                 day notice period, the Corporation informs the Dealer Member that it will be reviewing the
                 proposed change and the change will require Corporation approval.
2248. – 2264. Reserved.

PART D - BRANCH OFFICES OF DEALER MEMBERS
2265. Introduction
         (1)     Part D of Rule 2200 describes how Dealer Members’ branch offices participate in the Corporation
                 and its Regions.
2266. Branch office members
         (1)     Every Dealer Member’s business location in a Region with a Supervisor, who is normally present at
                 the business location, is a branch office member of the Region.




Series 2000 | Dealer Member Organization and Individual Approval Rules                                              Rule 2200
                                                                         Investment Dealer and Partially Consolidated Rules

2267. Branch office member’s representation
         (1)     A branch office member may participate in governing the Region in which the branch office is
                 located, as follows:
                 (i)     it has the same privileges in its Region as any other branch office member, except that at a
                         Region meeting, a Dealer Member only has one vote in the Region, no matter how many
                         branch office members it has, and
                 (ii)    its Region representative is eligible for election as chair, vice-chair or member of the
                         Regional Council for that Region.
2268. Fees
         (1)     A Dealer Member does not have to pay an annual fee or entrance fee for its branch office
                 members.
2269. – 2279. Reserved.

PART E - TRADE NAMES AND DISCLOSURES
2280. Introduction
         (1)     Part E of Rule 2200 covers a Dealer Member’s use of trade names, Corporation membership
                 disclosure and Investor Protection Fund membership disclosure.
2281. Trade names
         (1)     If a Dealer Member carries on business under a trade name, the trade name must be owned by
                 the Dealer Member, an Approved Person of the Dealer Member or an affiliate of the Dealer
                 Member.
         (2)     An Approved Person must not conduct any business under a trade name that is not owned by the
                 Dealer Member or its affiliate without the Dealer Member’s prior consent.
         (3)     A Dealer Member or Approved Person must not use a trade name that any other Dealer Member
                 uses unless:
                 (i)     the Dealer Members are related companies or affiliate companies, or
                 (ii)    the relationship with the other Dealer Member is that of introducing broker and carrying
                         broker.
         (4)     A Dealer Member or Approved Person must not use a deceptive or misleading trade name.
2282. Corporation notification
         (1)     A Dealer Member must notify the Corporation before it:
                 (i)     uses any trade name other than the Dealer Member’s legal name, or
                 (ii)    transfers a trade name to another Dealer Member.
         (2)     The Corporation may prohibit a Dealer Member or Approved Person from using a trade name that
                 is:
                 (i)     contrary to sections 2281, 2282 or2283,
                 (ii)    contrary to the public interest, or
                 (iii)   otherwise objectionable.

Series 2000 | Dealer Member Organization and Individual Approval Rules                                              Rule 2200
                                                                         Investment Dealer and Partially Consolidated Rules

2283. Displaying the full legal name
         (1)     A Dealer Member must include its full legal name on all contracts and materials used to
                 communicate with the public, whether or not it uses a trade name.
         (2)     An Approved Person that uses a trade name different from that of the Dealer Member on
                 materials used to communicate with the public must also include the Dealer Member’s full legal
                 name in size at least equal to that of the Approved Persons’ trade name.
         (3)     Materials used to communicate with the public include, but are not limited to the following:
                 letterhead, business cards, invoices, trade confirmations, monthly statements, websites, research
                 reports and advertisements.
2284. Investor protection fund membership disclosure requirements for Dealer Members
         (1)     A Dealer Member must disclose to its clients:
                 (i)     that it is a member of an investor protection fund,
                 (ii)    the name of the investor protection fund, and
                 (iii)   the investor protection fund coverage available for eligible accounts,
                 in accordance with the IPF Disclosure Policy.
2285. Corporation membership disclosure requirements for Dealer Members
         (1)     A Dealer Member must disclose to its clients:
                 (i)     that it is regulated, and
                 (ii)    the name of its regulator,
                 in accordance with the Corporation Membership Disclosure Policy.
2286. –2299. Reserved.




Series 2000 | Dealer Member Organization and Individual Approval Rules                                              Rule 2200
                                                                         Investment Dealer and Partially Consolidated Rules

RULE 2300 | PRINCIPAL AND AGENT RELATIONSHIPS

2301. Introduction
         (1)     Rule 2300 describes the requirements of relationships between Dealer Members and their
                 agents.
2302. Principal and agent relationships
          (1)    An individual who conducts securities and derivatives related business on behalf of a Dealer
                 Member must be an employee (which includes an agent) of the Dealer Member.
         (2)     A Dealer Member must not allow a corporation or other non-individual entity to conduct
                 securities and derivatives related business on its behalf.
2303. Written agreement between the Dealer Member and the Corporation
         (1)     Before engaging any agents to conduct securities and derivatives related business, a Dealer
                 Member must enter into a written agreement with the Corporation.
         (2)     The written agreement must contain terms describing the Dealer Member’s responsibility:
                 (i)     for the agent’s conduct, including the agent’s compliance with Corporation requirements
                         and securities laws, and
                 (ii)    to clients for the agent’s acts and omissions relating to the Dealer Member’s business.
         (3)     The Corporation must be satisfied with the form of the written agreement.
         (4)     The written agreement must be in a form similar to the following:
                                        “Agreement between a Dealer Member and the Corporation”
                 1.      Recitals
                         (i)     As a Dealer Member of [Name of Corporation], the Dealer Member agrees it is
                                 subject to Corporation requirements.
                         (ii)    Section 2303 of the Corporation Investment Dealer and Partially Consolidated Rules,
                                 “Written agreement between the Dealer Member and the Corporation”, requires the
                                 Dealer Member to make this agreement with the Corporation.
                         (iii)   This agreement is in addition to and does not alter Corporation requirements or any
                                 other agreement between the Dealer Member and the Corporation.
                 2.      Agreement with the Agent
                         (i)     The Dealer Member must enter into a written agreement with each of its agents as
                                 required by section 2304 of the Corporation Investment Dealer and Partially
                                 Consolidated Rules, “Written agreement between the Dealer Member and its
                                 agents”, and any successor rules relating to principal and agent relationships.
                         (ii)    The agreement must require that the agent complies with all applicable laws and
                                 Corporation requirements.
                 3.      Supervision of the Agent
                         The Dealer Member must treat each of its agents as employees with respect to:
                         (i)     administration of Corporation requirements,


Series 2000 | Dealer Member Organization and Individual Approval Rules                                              Rule 2300
                                                                         Investment Dealer and Partially Consolidated Rules

                         (ii)    supervision of the agent under Corporation requirements, and
                         (iii)   ensuring its agents comply with all applicable laws and Corporation requirements.
                  4.      Written Disclosure of Respective Responsibilities to Clients
                          The Dealer Member or the agent must disclose to clients at the time of opening an
                          account:
                          (i)     the list of securities and derivatives related business conducted by the agent for
                                  which the Dealer Member is responsible, and
                         (ii)    that the Dealer Member is not responsible for any other business activity conducted
                                 by the agent.
                 5.      Disclosure to Clients
                         The disclosure to clients must be made using the following language in the account
                         application:
                                 “If your investment advisor is an agent of [the Dealer Member name], [Dealer
                                 Member name] is irrevocably liable to you for any acts and omissions of your
                                 investment advisor with regard to [Dealer Member name] business as if the
                                 investment advisor were an employee of [Dealer Member name]. By continuing
                                 to deal with our firm, you accept our offer of indemnity.”
                 6.      Disclosure by Agent
                         Where the disclosure described in 4(i) and (ii) is made by the agent, the Dealer Member
                         must ensure that the agent has made the disclosure directly to the clients.
                 7.      Regulatory Authority of the Corporation
                         The Dealer Member acknowledges that the Corporation has the authority to regulate and
                         enforce the provisions set out in the Dealer Member and agent agreement.
                 8.      Governing Laws
                         This agreement is governed by the laws of [applicable province] and the laws of Canada.
                 9.      Continuing Benefit
                         The agreement is for the benefit of and binding upon the parties and their successors and
                         assigns. The Dealer Member may not assign the agreement without the Corporation’s prior
                         written consent.
                         DATED as of the __________day of _____________, ______
                         [DEALER MEMBER]
                         ______________________
                         [NAME AND TITLE OF SIGNING INDIVIDUAL]
                         ______________________”
2304. Written agreement between the Dealer Member and its agents
         (1)     The Dealer Member and the agent who conducts securities and derivatives related business must
                 enter into a written agreement.


Series 2000 | Dealer Member Organization and Individual Approval Rules                                              Rule 2300
                                                                         Investment Dealer and Partially Consolidated Rules

         (2)     The written agreement must not contain any terms inconsistent with Corporation requirements
                 or securities laws.
         (3)     The Corporation must be satisfied with the form of the written agreement before the Dealer
                 Member finalizes the agreement with the agent.
         (4)     The Dealer Member must certify to the Corporation that the written agreement complies with
                 Rule 2300 and any other applicable Corporation requirements.
         (5)     The Corporation may request that the Dealer Member obtain a legal opinion confirming
                 subsection 2304(4).
         (6)     The Corporation must be satisfied that the written agreement complies with applicable laws
                 relating to tax matters.
         (7)     The written agreement must contain the following minimum terms:
                 (i)     Compliance with the applicable laws
                         The agent and the Dealer Member confirm that this agreement does not violate
                         applicable laws.
                 (ii)    Confirmation of supremacy of Corporation requirements
                         The agent and the Dealer Member confirm that:
                         (a)     this agreement is made in compliance with Corporation requirements,
                         (b)     if there is an inconsistency between this agreement and any applicable Corporation
                                 requirements, the Corporation requirements will prevail,
                         (c)     any inconsistent terms will be deemed severed and deleted,
                         (d)     The Corporation has the authority to regulate and enforce the provisions set out in
                                 this agreement, and
                         (e)     this agreement will be interpreted and enforced to give full effect to any applicable
                                 Corporation requirements.
                 (iii)   Compliance by the agent with applicable laws, securities laws, and Corporation
                         requirements
                         (a)     The agent warrants to the Dealer Member that it is appropriately registered or
                                 licensed, in good standing and in compliance with all applicable laws, securities laws
                                 and Corporation requirements.
                         (b)     The agent covenants to comply with all applicable laws, securities laws and
                                 Corporation requirements.
                         (c)     The agent agrees to be bound by and comply with the warranties and covenants
                                 above throughout the term of the agreement.
                 (iv)    Conduct of the agent’s business
                         (a)     The agent agrees to conduct all business in the Dealer Member’s name, subject to
                                 sections 2281 through 2283 relating to the use of trade names.
                         (b)     The agent agrees to conduct all securities and derivatives related business through
                                 the Dealer Member.
                 (v)     Supervision of the agent by the Dealer Member

Series 2000 | Dealer Member Organization and Individual Approval Rules                                              Rule 2300
                                                                         Investment Dealer and Partially Consolidated Rules

                         The Dealer Member agrees to be:
                         (a)     responsible for the supervision of the agent’s conduct to provide reasonable
                                 assurance of the agent’s compliance with Corporation requirements and the
                                 requirements of any other securities regulatory authority to which the Dealer
                                 Member is subject, and
                         (b)     liable to clients (and other third parties) for the agent’s conduct as if they were an
                                 employee.
                 (vi)    Written disclosure to clients
                         If the Dealer Member and the agent have agreed that the agent will advise the clients
                         directly:
                         (a)     the list of securities and derivatives related business conducted by the agent for
                                 which the Dealer Member is responsible, and
                         (b)     that the Dealer Member is not responsible for any other business activity conducted
                                 by the agent,
                         the Dealer Member agrees to be responsible for ensuring that the agent has done so.
                 (vii) Dealer Member assumes responsibility for clients
                         (a)     In the event that:
                                 (I)     the Corporation or another securities regulatory authority has advised the
                                         Dealer Member that it has started an investigation relating to allegations of
                                         misconduct by the agent, or
                                 (II)    the Dealer Member has reasonable grounds to believe that the agent has
                                         contravened or may be contravening one or more Corporation requirements or
                                         securities laws,
                                 the Dealer Member may immediately and without notice to the agent, assume
                                 responsibility for the client to the exclusion of the agent.
                         (b)     The agent may not have any dealings or communications with the client as long as
                                 the Dealer Member has assumed this responsibility.
                         (c)     The Dealer Member may designate another qualified person to provide services to
                                 the client, and that person may receive any remuneration that would have been paid
                                 to the agent.
                 (viii) Outside activities
                         (a)     The agent agrees not to conduct any outside activity without disclosing to and
                                 obtaining the written consent of the Dealer Member.
                         (b)     If the agent is involved in an outside activity, the Dealer Member agrees to monitor
                                 and enforce compliance with the terms of this agreement directly and not through
                                 another employer or principal of the agent.
                         (c)     The agent agrees to ensure that the outside activity will not interfere with the Dealer
                                 Member or the Corporation monitoring and enforcing compliance by the agent with
                                 this agreement or Corporation requirements.



Series 2000 | Dealer Member Organization and Individual Approval Rules                                              Rule 2300
                                                                         Investment Dealer and Partially Consolidated Rules

                  (ix)    Access to premises
                         The agent agrees to give the Dealer Member unrestricted access to the premises where the
                         agent conducts securities and derivatives related business on the Dealer Member’s behalf.
                 (x)     Records
                         The agent agrees that the books and records kept by the agent for the Dealer Member’s
                         business:
                         (a)     will conform to Corporation requirements,
                         (b)     are the Dealer Member’s property,
                         (c)     are available at all times for review by and delivery to the Dealer Member, and
                         (d)     shall be delivered to the Dealer Member on termination of the agreement.
                  (xi)    Insurance
                          The Dealer Member agrees to maintain financial institution bond and insurance policies
                          that cover the agent’s conduct relating to the securities and derivatives related business
                          they conduct for the Dealer Member.
                 (xii) Assignment of agreement
                         The agent acknowledges that the Dealer Member has the right to assign to the Corporation
                         any or all of the Dealer Member’s rights to enforce the terms of this agreement that relate
                         to Corporation requirements.
2305. – 2399. Reserved.




Series 2000 | Dealer Member Organization and Individual Approval Rules                                              Rule 2300
                                                                         Investment Dealer and Partially Consolidated Rules

RULE 2400 | ACCEPTABLE BACK OFFICE ARRANGEMENTS

2401. Introduction
         (1)     In order to manage back office expenses, Dealer Members may enter into arrangements that
                 involve back office service sharing with another organization. Services shared may include any
                 combination of: trade execution, trade clearing and settlement, trade financing, trade related
                 cash and security custody and trade related books and records. In some cases, before an
                 arrangement can commence, the parties must agree to specific Corporation arrangement
                 conditions, including obtaining Corporation approval of the arrangement.
         (2)     Sections 2401 through 2480 sets out the specific Corporation requirements for a number of
                 arrangements that a Dealer Member may enter into and is organized as follows:
                 Part A – Requirements for acceptable arrangements between two Dealer Members including:
                              Part A.1 – General requirements
                                              [sections 2403 through 2407]
                              Part A.2 – Specific requirements for Type 1 introducing broker / carrying broker
                                         arrangements
                                              [section 2410]
                              Part A.3 – Specific requirements for Type 2 introducing broker / carrying broker
                                         arrangements
                                              [section 2415]
                              Part A.4 – Specific requirements for Type 3 introducing broker / carrying broker
                                         arrangements
                                              [section 2420]
                              Part A.5 – Specific requirements for Type 4 introducing broker / carrying broker
                                         arrangements
                                              [section 2425]
                 Part B – Requirements for acceptable arrangements between a Dealer Member and a Mutual
                          Fund Dealer Member
                              [sections 2430 and 2431]
                 Part C – Requirements for acceptable arrangement between a Dealer Member and a foreign
                          affiliate dealer
                              [sections 2435 and 2436]
                 Part D – Permitted arrangements that are not considered to be introducing broker / carrying
                          broker arrangements
                              [sections 2460 and 2461]
                 Part E – Prohibited arrangements
                              [section 2480]



Series 2000 | Dealer Member Organization and Individual Approval Rules                                              Rule 2400
                                                                         Investment Dealer and Partially Consolidated Rules

2402. Definitions
         (1)     The following terms have the meaning set out below when used in sections 2402 through 2480:
                   “clearing arrangement”           An arrangement entered into between two dealers under which all of the
                                                    following services are provided by one dealer (“clearing broker”) to the other
                                                    dealer for one or more lines of business:
                                                    (i) trade execution,
                                                    (ii) trade settlement, and
                                                    (iii) client account bookkeeping.
                                                    Trade financing or account financing, custody of client cash and custody of
                                                    client security positions services must not be provided as part of this
                                                    arrangement.
                  “introducing broker /             An arrangement entered into between two dealers under which all of the
                  carrying broker                   following services are provided by one dealer, the carrying broker, to the
                  arrangement”                      other dealer, the introducing broker, for one or more lines of business:
                                                    (i) trade settlement,
                                                    (ii) custody of client cash,
                                                    (iii) custody of client security positions, and
                                                    (iv) client account bookkeeping.
                                                    Trade execution and trade financing or account financing services may or may
                                                    not be provided as part of this arrangement.


PART A - ARRANGEMENTS BETWEEN TWO DEALER MEMBERS – GENERAL REQUIREMENTS

PART A.1 - GENERAL REQUIREMENTS
2403. Arrangements that may be executed
         (1)     A Dealer Member that wants to become an introducing broker may enter into one of the
                 following introducing broker / carrying broker arrangements with another Dealer Member:
                 (i)     a Type 1 or 2 introducing broker/carrying broker arrangement for all of its Dealer Member
                         related activities,
                 (ii)    a Type 1 or 2 introducing broker/carrying broker arrangement for all of its Dealer Member
                         related activities other than trading in futures contracts and futures contract options, or
                 (iii)   a Type 3 or 4 introducing broker/carrying broker arrangement for one or more of its Dealer
                         Member related activities business lines.
2404. Additional conditions that apply to an introducing broker under a Type 1 introducing broker/carrying
      broker arrangement
         (1)     A Dealer Member that is an introducing broker under a Type 1 introducing broker/carrying broker
                 arrangement with another Dealer Member:
                 (i)     must not enter into any additional introducing broker / carrying broker arrangements with
                         another Dealer Member unless the arrangement is a Type 1 introducing broker/carrying
                         broker arrangement or Type 2 introducing broker/carrying broker arrangement that


Series 2000 | Dealer Member Organization and Individual Approval Rules                                                     Rule 2400
                                                                         Investment Dealer and Partially Consolidated Rules

                         provides back office services exclusive to trading in futures contracts and futures contract
                         options,
                 (ii)    must not self-clear any part of its Dealer Member related activities other than self-clearing
                         trading in futures contracts and futures contracts options, and
                 (iii)   must use its carrying broker’s facilities for its principal trading, settlement, and securities
                         custody.
2405. Additional conditions that apply to an introducing broker under a Type 2 introducing broker/carrying
      broker arrangement
         (1)     A Dealer Member that is an introducing broker under a Type 2 introducing broker/carrying broker
                 arrangement with another Dealer Member:
                 (i)     must not enter into any additional introducing broker / carrying broker arrangements with
                         another Dealer Member unless the arrangement is a Type 1 introducing broker/carrying
                         broker arrangement or Type 2 introducing broker/carrying broker arrangement that
                         provides back office services exclusive to trading in futures contracts and futures contract
                         options,
                 (ii)    must not self-clear any part of its Dealer Member related activities other than self-clearing
                         trading in futures contracts and futures contracts options, and
                 (iii)   may use brokers other than its carrying broker for its principal trading, settlement, and
                         securities custody.
2406. Additional conditions that apply to an introducing broker under either a Type 3 introducing
      broker/carrying broker or a Type 4 introducing broker/carrying broker arrangement
         (1)     A Dealer Member that is an introducing broker under a Type 3 introducing broker/carrying broker
                 arrangement or Type 4 introducing broker/carrying broker arrangement with another Dealer
                 Member:
                 (i)     must not enter into any Type 1 or Type 2 introducing broker/carrying broker arrangements
                         for one or more of its remaining Dealer Member related activities business lines,
                 (ii)    may, where a business case can be made, enter into additional Type 3 introducing
                         broker/carrying broker arrangement or Type 4 introducing broker/carrying broker
                         arrangements for one or more of its remaining Dealer Member related activities business
                         lines,
                 (iii)   may self-clear one or more of its remaining Dealer Member related activities business lines,
                         and
                 (iv)    may use brokers other than its carrying broker for its principal trading, settlement, and
                         securities custody.
2407. Requirement for an agreement
         (1)     A Dealer Member that is an introducing broker may enter into an arrangement permitted within
                 sections 2403 through 2406 with another Dealer Member if both parties enter into a written
                 introducing broker / carrying broker agreement:
                 (i)     in a form acceptable to the Corporation,


Series 2000 | Dealer Member Organization and Individual Approval Rules                                              Rule 2400
                                                                         Investment Dealer and Partially Consolidated Rules

                 (ii)    that specifies the type of arrangement being entered into as a Type 1, Type 2, Type 3 or
                         Type 4 introducing broker/carrying broker arrangement,
                 (iii)   whose terms comply with the requirements of sections 2401 through 2480 that apply to
                         the type of arrangement being entered into, and
                 (iv)    which is approved by the Corporation in advance of it coming into effect.
2408. – 2409. Reserved.

PART A.2 - SPECIFIC REQUIREMENTS FOR TYPE 1 INTRODUCING BROKER / CARRYING BROKER
           ARRANGEMENTS
2410. Type 1 introducing broker/carrying broker arrangement – requirements
         The parties to a Type 1 introducing broker / carrying broker arrangement between two Dealer
         Members must comply with the following requirements:
         (1)     Minimum capital requirement
                 (i)     The introducing broker must maintain at all times minimum capital of $75,000 for the
                         purposes of calculating risk adjusted capital.
         (2)     Margin requirements to be provided by the introducing broker
                 (i)     The introducing broker must maintain the required margin for principal business it
                         introduces to the carrying broker.
         (3)     Margin requirements to be provided by the carrying broker
                 (i)     The carrying broker must maintain the required margin:
                         (a)     for client business it carries for the introducing broker, and
                         (b)     for any settlement date equity deficiency amounts relating to the principal business it
                                 carries for the introducing broker in accordance with the margin requirements for an
                                 account with another regulated entity, as set out in Note 4 of the Notes and
                                 Instructions to Schedule 5 of Form 1.
         (4)     Offsets of carrying broker margin requirements against deposits
                 (i)     The carrying broker may reduce any margin it is required to provide under subsection
                         2410(3) by the least of the following amounts:
                         (a)     the margin requirement,
                         (b)     the loan value of any introducing broker deposits held by the carrying broker, and
                         (c)     the introducing broker’s excess risk adjusted capital.
                         Where a reduction is taken, the carrying broker must promptly notify the introducing
                         broker.
         (5)     Reporting client balances
                 (i)     When calculating risk adjusted capital, the carrying broker must report on Statement A and
                         Schedule 4 of Form 1 and the Monthly Financial Report all client accounts introduced by
                         the introducing broker. The introducing broker must not report these accounts.
         (6)     Net client balances / funding


Series 2000 | Dealer Member Organization and Individual Approval Rules                                              Rule 2400
                                                                         Investment Dealer and Partially Consolidated Rules

                 (i)     The carrying broker must meet financing requirements for client accounts introduced by
                         the introducing broker.
         (7)     Deposits provided to the carrying broker by the introducing broker
                 (i)     The carrying broker must:
                         (a)     segregate security deposits provided by the introducing broker,
                         (b)     hold cash deposits in a separate bank account in trust for the introducing broker, and
                         (c)     report all deposits it receives from the introducing broker as a liability on its Form 1
                                 and Monthly Financial Report.
                 (ii)    The introducing broker must:
                         (a)     report as a non-allowable asset on the introducing broker’s Form 1 and Monthly
                                 Financial Report:
                                 (I)     any portion of a deposit that a carrying broker has used to offset its margin
                                         requirements under subsection 2410(4), and
                                 (II)    any portion of a deposit that is impaired in value because the carrying broker
                                         carries client accounts with unsecured debit balances,
                         and,
                         (b)     report as an allowable asset on the introducing broker’s Form 1 and Monthly
                                 Financial Report any remaining deposits not classified as a non-allowable asset under
                                 sub-clause 2410(7)(ii)(a).
         (8)     Concentration calculations
                 (i)     When completing the concentration calculations in Schedules 9 and 12 of Form 1, the
                         carrying broker must include, and the introducing broker must not include, all client
                         positions the carrying broker maintains for the introducing broker.
         (9)     Segregating client securities
                 (i)     The carrying broker must segregate securities for clients introduced by the introducing
                         broker in accordance with Corporation requirements relating to segregation.
         (10) Free credit segregation
                 (i)     The carrying broker must segregate free credits for client accounts introduced by the
                         introducing broker in accordance with Corporation requirements including, but not limited
                         to, Statement D of Form 1.
         (11) Insurance coverage requirements of the introducing broker
                 (i)     The introducing broker must:
                         (a)     include all accounts introduced to the carrying broker:
                                 (I)     when calculating client net equity for the purposes of determining minimum
                                         Financial Institution Bond insurance coverage levels under section 4458, and
                                 (II)    when determining adequate insurance coverage levels for registered mail
                                         under section 4455,
                         (b)     maintain Financial Institution Bond insurance coverage for the types of losses
                                 specified under section 4456 and in the amounts that meet the minimum coverage
                                 levels specified in section 4458, and
Series 2000 | Dealer Member Organization and Individual Approval Rules                                              Rule 2400
                                                                         Investment Dealer and Partially Consolidated Rules

                         (c)     maintain adequate insurance for registered mail specified under section 4455.
         (12) Insurance coverage requirements of the carrying broker
                 (i)     The carrying broker must:
                         (a)     include all accounts it carries for the introducing broker:
                                 (I)     when calculating client net equity for the purposes of determining minimum
                                         Financial Institution Bond insurance coverage levels under section 4458, and
                                 (II)    when determining adequate insurance coverage levels for registered mail
                                         under section 4455,
                         (b)     maintain Financial Institution Bond insurance coverage for the types of losses
                                 specified under section 4456 and in the amounts that meet the minimum coverage
                                 levels specified in section 4457, and
                         (c)     maintain adequate insurance for registered mail specified under section 4455.
         (13) Client account opening required disclosure
                 (i)     At the time of opening a client account, the introducing broker must:
                         (a)     advise the client of:
                                 (I)     its relationship to the carrying broker, and
                                 (II)    the client’s relationship to the carrying broker,
                         and
                         (b)     obtain from the client a Corporation approved form acknowledging it has provided
                                 the client with the disclosure required by sub-clause 2410(13)(i)(a).
         (14) Parties to margin and guarantee documents
                 (i)     The introducing broker and the carrying broker must both be parties to any margin
                         agreements and guarantee documents.
         (15) Disclosure on contracts, statements and correspondence
                 (i)     To ensure ongoing disclosure of the introducing broker / carrying broker relationship to
                         clients, the introducing broker and carrying broker must both show their names and roles
                         on all client account contracts, statements, correspondence and other documents. Because
                         of this ongoing disclosure, annual disclosure of the introducing broker / carrying broker
                         relationship is not required.
         (16) Clients introduced to the carrying broker
                 (i)     A client introduced to the carrying broker by the introducing broker must be considered a
                         client of both the introducing broker and the carrying broker for the purposes of
                         compliance with Corporation requirements.
         (17) Compliance with non-financial requirements
                 (i)     The introducing broker and the carrying broker are jointly and severally responsible for
                         compliance with all non-financial Corporation requirements for each account the
                         introducing broker introduces to the carrying broker unless stated otherwise in this section.
         (18) Handling client cash
                 (i)     The introducing broker must not accept or handle client funds in the form of money.

Series 2000 | Dealer Member Organization and Individual Approval Rules                                              Rule 2400
                                                                         Investment Dealer and Partially Consolidated Rules

                 (ii)    With the carrying broker’s advance approval, the introducing broker may accept a cheque
                         in the carrying broker’s name from a client whose account is carried by the carrying broker
                         and:
                         (a)     deliver it to the carrying broker on the day it is received by the introducing broker or
                                 the next business day, or
                         (b)     arrange for the carrying broker to pick it up on the day it is received by the
                                 introducing broker or the next business day.
                 (iii)   A client may send a cheque directly to the carrying broker.
         (19) Reporting of introducing broker principal positions
                 (i)     The introducing broker must report all its principal positions carried by a carrying broker as
                         inventory on its Form 1 and Monthly Financial Report.
                 (ii)    The carrying broker must report the balance of the principal trading account the
                         introducing broker has with the carrying broker on its Form 1 and Monthly Financial Report.
2411. – 2414. Reserved.

PART A.3 - SPECIFIC REQUIREMENTS FOR TYPE 2 INTRODUCING BROKER / CARRYING BROKER
           ARRANGEMENTS
2415. Type 2 introducing broker/carrying broker arrangement – requirements
         The parties to a Type 2 introducing broker / carrying broker arrangement between two Dealer Members
         must comply with the following requirements:
         (1)     Minimum capital requirement
                 (i)     The introducing broker must maintain at all times minimum capital of $250,000 for the
                         purposes of calculating risk adjusted capital.
         (2)     Margin requirements to be provided by the introducing broker
                 (i)     The introducing broker must maintain the required margin for principal business it
                         introduces to the carrying broker.
         (3)     Margin requirements to be provided by the carrying broker
                 (i)     The carrying broker must maintain the required margin:
                         (a)     for client business it carries for the introducing broker, and
                         (b)     for any settlement date equity deficiency amounts relating to the principal business it
                                 carries for the introducing broker in accordance with the margin requirements for an
                                 account with another regulated entity, as set out in Note 4 of the Notes and
                                 Instructions to Schedule 5 of Form 1.
         (4)     Offsets of carrying broker margin requirements against deposits
                 (i)     The carrying broker may reduce any margin it is required to provide under subsection
                         2415(3) by the least of the following amounts:
                         (a)     the margin requirement,
                         (b)     the loan value of any introducing broker deposits held by the carrying broker, and
                         (c)     the introducing broker’s excess risk adjusted capital.

Series 2000 | Dealer Member Organization and Individual Approval Rules                                              Rule 2400
                                                                         Investment Dealer and Partially Consolidated Rules

                         Where a reduction is taken, the carrying broker must promptly notify the introducing
                         broker.
         (5)     Reporting client balances
                 (i)     When calculating risk adjusted capital, the carrying broker must report on Statement A and
                         Schedule 4 of Form 1 and the Monthly Financial Report all client accounts introduced by
                         the introducing broker. The introducing broker must not report these accounts.
         (6)     Net client balances / funding
                 (i)     The carrying broker must meet financing requirements for client accounts introduced by
                         the introducing broker.
         (7)     Deposits provided to the carrying broker by the introducing broker
                 (i)     The carrying broker must:
                         (a)     segregate security deposits provided by the introducing broker,
                         (b)     hold cash deposits in a separate bank account in trust for the introducing broker, and
                         (c)     report all deposits it receives from the introducing broker as a liability on its Form 1
                                 and Monthly Financial Report.
                 (ii)    The introducing broker must:
                         (a)     report as a non-allowable asset on the introducing broker’s Form 1 and Monthly
                                 Financial Report:
                                  (I)     any portion of a deposit that a carrying broker has used to offset its margin
                                          requirements under subsection 2415(4), and
                                  (II)    any portion of a deposit that is impaired in value because the carrying broker
                                          carries client accounts with unsecured debit balances,
                         and,
                         (b)     report as an allowable asset on the introducing broker’s Form 1 and Monthly
                                 Financial Report any remaining deposits not classified as a non-allowable asset under
                                 sub-clause 2415(7)(ii)(a).
         (8)     Concentration calculations
                 (i)     When completing the concentration calculations in Schedules 9 and 12 of Form 1, the
                         carrying broker must include, and the introducing broker must not include, all client
                         positions the carrying broker maintains for the introducing broker.
         (9)     Segregating client securities
                 (i)     The carrying broker must segregate securities for clients introduced by the introducing
                         broker in accordance with Corporation requirements relating to segregation.
         (10) Free credit segregation
                 (i)     The carrying broker must segregate free credits for client accounts introduced by the
                         introducing broker in accordance with Corporation requirements including, but not limited
                         to, Statement D of Form 1.
         (11) Insurance coverage requirements of the introducing broker
                 (i)     The introducing broker must:

Series 2000 | Dealer Member Organization and Individual Approval Rules                                              Rule 2400
                                                                         Investment Dealer and Partially Consolidated Rules

                         (a)     include all accounts introduced to the carrying broker:
                                 (I)     when calculating client net equity for the purposes of determining minimum
                                         Financial Institution Bond insurance coverage levels under section 4458, and
                                 (II)    when determining adequate insurance coverage levels for registered mail
                                         under section 4455,
                         (b)     maintain Financial Institution Bond insurance coverage for the types of losses
                                 specified under section 4456 and in the amounts that meet the minimum coverage
                                 levels specified in section 4458, and
                         (c)     maintain adequate insurance for registered mail specified under section 4455.
         (12) Insurance coverage requirements of the carrying broker
                 (i)     The carrying broker must:
                         (a)     include all accounts it carries for the introducing broker:
                                 (I)     when calculating client net equity for the purposes of determining minimum
                                         Financial Institution Bond insurance coverage levels under section 4458, and
                                 (II)    when determining adequate insurance coverage levels for registered mail
                                         under section 4455,
                         (b)     maintain Financial Institution Bond insurance coverage for the types of losses
                                 specified under section 4456 and in the amounts that meet the minimum coverage
                                 levels specified in section 4457, and
                         (c)     maintain adequate insurance for registered mail specified under section 4455.
         (13) Client account opening required disclosure
                 (i)     At the time of opening a client account the introducing broker must:
                         (a)     advise the client of:
                                 (I)     its relationship to the carrying broker, and
                                 (II)    the client’s relationship to the carrying broker, and
                         (b)     obtain from the client a Corporation approved form acknowledging it has provided
                                 the client with the disclosure required by sub-clause 2415(13)(i)(a).
         (14) Parties to margin and guarantee documents
                 (i)     The introducing broker and the carrying broker must both be parties to any margin
                         agreements and guarantee documents.
         (15) Disclosure on contracts, statements and correspondence
                 (i)     The introducing broker must provide either ongoing or annual disclosure of its introducing
                         broker / carrying broker relationship to clients as follows:
                         (a)     where the introducing broker elects to provide ongoing relationship disclosure, the
                                 introducing broker and carrying broker must both show their names and roles on all
                                 client account contracts, statements, correspondence and other documents. Because
                                 of this ongoing disclosure, annual disclosure of the introducing broker / carrying
                                 broker relationship is not required, or
                         (b)     where the introducing broker elects to provide annual relationship disclosure:


Series 2000 | Dealer Member Organization and Individual Approval Rules                                              Rule 2400
                                                                         Investment Dealer and Partially Consolidated Rules

                                 (I)     the introducing broker must show its name on all client account contracts,
                                         statements, correspondence and other documents, and
                                 (II)    the introducing broker must provide an annual written disclosure to each of its
                                         clients whose accounts are carried by a carrying broker outlining the
                                         relationship between:
                                          (A)     the introducing broker and the carrying broker, and
                                          (B)     the client and the carrying broker.
                                 However, if the name and role of each of the introducing broker and the carrying
                                 broker is shown on all contracts, statements, correspondence and other documents,
                                 the annual disclosure under paragraph 2415(15)(i)(b)(II) is not required.
         (16) Clients introduced to the carrying broker
                 (i)     A client introduced to the carrying broker by the introducing broker must be considered a
                         client of both the introducing broker and the carrying broker for the purposes of
                         compliance with Corporation requirements.
         (17) Compliance with non-financial requirements
                 (i)     For each account it introduces to the carrying broker, the introducing broker is responsible
                         for compliance with all non-financial Corporation requirements unless stated otherwise in
                         this section.
         (18) Handling client cash
                 (i)     The introducing broker must not accept or handle client funds in the form of money.
                 (ii)    The introducing broker may accept a cheque from a client in the name of the introducing
                         broker or carrying broker, provided that the cheque is deposited into a bank account in the
                         carrying broker’s name or forwarded on to the carrying broker on the day it is received by
                         the introducing broker or the next business day.
         (19) Reporting of introducing broker principal positions
                 (i)     The introducing broker must report all its principal positions carried by a carrying broker as
                         inventory on its Form 1 and Monthly Financial Report.
                 (ii)    The carrying broker must report the balance of the principal trading account the
                         introducing broker has with the carrying broker on its Form 1 and Monthly Financial Report.
2416. – 2419. Reserved.

PART A.4 - SPECIFIC REQUIREMENTS FOR TYPE 3 INTRODUCING BROKER / CARRYING BROKER
           ARRANGEMENTS
2420. Type 3 introducing broker/carrying arrangement – requirements
          The parties to a Type 3 introducing broker / carrying broker arrangement between two Dealer
          Members must comply with the following requirements:
         (1)     Minimum capital requirement
                 (i)     The introducing broker must maintain at all times minimum capital of $250,000 for the
                         purposes of calculating risk adjusted capital.


Series 2000 | Dealer Member Organization and Individual Approval Rules                                              Rule 2400
                                                                         Investment Dealer and Partially Consolidated Rules

         (2)     Margin requirements to be provided by the introducing broker
                 (i)     The introducing broker must maintain the required margin:
                         (a)     for principal business it introduces to the carrying broker, and
                         (b)     for client business it introduces to the carrying broker.
         (3)     Margin requirements to be provided by the carrying broker
                 (i)     The carrying broker must maintain the required margin for any settlement date equity
                         deficiency amounts relating to the principal business it carries for the introducing broker in
                         accordance with the margin requirements for an account with another regulated entity, as
                         set out in Note 4 of the Notes and Instructions to Schedule 5 of Form 1.
         (4)     Offsets of carrying broker margin requirements against deposits
                 (i)     The carrying broker may reduce any margin it is required to provide under subsection
                         2420(3) by the lesser of the following amounts:
                         (a)     the margin requirement, and
                         (b)     the loan value of any introducing broker deposits held by the carrying broker.
                  Where a reduction is taken, the carrying broker must promptly notify the introducing broker.
         (5)     Reporting client balances
                 (i)     When calculating risk adjusted capital, the introducing broker must report on Statement A
                         and Schedule 4 of Form 1 and Monthly Financial Report all client accounts introduced to
                         the carrying broker. The carrying broker must not report those accounts.
                 (ii)    The carrying broker must report on its Form 1 and Monthly Financial Report one balance
                         owing to or from the introducing broker, representing client accounts it carries for the
                         introducing broker.
                 (iii)   Although the carrying broker reports just one balance, its obligations and liabilities to each
                         client whose account it carries for the introducing broker are not released, discharged,
                         limited, or otherwise affected.
         (6)     Net client balances / funding
                 (i)     The carrying broker must meet financing requirements for client accounts introduced by
                         the introducing broker.
         (7)     Deposits provided to the carrying broker by the introducing broker
                 (i)     The carrying broker must:
                          (a)     segregate security deposits provided by the introducing broker,
                          (b)     hold cash deposits in a separate bank account in trust for the introducing broker, and
                          (c)     report all deposits it receives from the introducing broker as a liability on its Form 1
                                  and Monthly Financial Report.
                 (ii)    The introducing broker must:
                          (a)     report as a non-allowable asset on the introducing broker’s Form 1 and Monthly
                                  Financial Report any portion of a deposit that a carrying broker has used to offset its
                                  margin requirements under subsection 2420(4), and



Series 2000 | Dealer Member Organization and Individual Approval Rules                                              Rule 2400
                                                                         Investment Dealer and Partially Consolidated Rules

                          (b)     report as an allowable asset on the introducing broker’s Form 1 and Monthly
                                  Financial Report any remaining deposits not classified as a non-allowable asset
                                  under sub-clause 2420(7)(ii)(a).
         (8)     Concentration calculations
                 (i)     When completing the concentration calculations in Schedules 9 and 12 of Form 1, the
                         introducing broker must include, and the carrying broker must not include, all client
                         positions the carrying broker maintains for the introducing broker.
         (9)     Segregating client securities
                 (i)     The carrying broker must segregate securities for clients introduced by the introducing
                         broker in accordance with Corporation requirements relating to segregation.
         (10) Free credit segregation
                 (i)     The carrying broker must segregate free credits for client accounts introduced by the
                         introducing broker in accordance with Corporation requirements including, but not limited
                         to, Statement D of Form 1.
         (11) Insurance coverage requirements of the introducing broker
                 (i)     The introducing broker must:
                          (a)     include all accounts introduced to the carrying broker:
                                 (I)     when calculating client net equity for the purposes of determining minimum
                                         Financial Institution Bond insurance coverage levels under section 4457 and
                                 (II)    when determining adequate insurance coverage levels for registered mail
                                         under section 4455,
                          (b)     maintain Financial Institution Bond insurance coverage for the types of losses
                                  specified under section 4456 and in the amounts that meet the minimum coverage
                                  levels specified in section 4457, and
                          (c)     maintain adequate insurance for registered mail specified under section 4455.
         (12) Insurance coverage requirements of the carrying broker
                 (i)     The carrying broker must:
                          (a)     include all accounts it carries for the introducing broker:
                                 (I)     when calculating client net equity for the purposes of determining minimum
                                         Financial Institution Bond insurance coverage levels under section 4457, and
                                 (II)    when determining adequate insurance coverage levels for registered mail
                                         under section 4455,
                          (b)     maintain Financial Institution Bond insurance coverage for the types of losses
                                  specified under section 4456 and in the amounts that meet the minimum coverage
                                  levels specified in section 4457, and
                          (c)     maintain adequate insurance for registered mail specified under section 4455.
         (13) Client account opening required disclosure
                 (i)     At the time of opening a client account the introducing broker must advise the client of:
                          (a)     its relationship to the carrying broker, and


Series 2000 | Dealer Member Organization and Individual Approval Rules                                              Rule 2400
                                                                         Investment Dealer and Partially Consolidated Rules

                          (b)     the client’s relationship to the carrying broker.
         (14) Parties to margin and guarantee documents
                 (i)     The introducing broker and the carrying broker must both be parties to any margin
                         agreements and guarantee documents.
         (15) Disclosure on contracts, statements and correspondence
                 (i)     The introducing broker must provide either ongoing or annual disclosure of its introducing
                         broker / carrying broker relationship to clients as follows:
                         (a)     where the introducing broker elects to provide ongoing relationship disclosure, the
                                 introducing broker and carrying broker must both show their names and roles on all
                                 client account contracts, statements, correspondence and other documents. Because
                                 of this ongoing disclosure, annual disclosure of the introducing broker / carrying
                                 broker relationship is not required, or
                         (b)     where the introducing broker elects to provide annual relationship disclosure:
                                 (I)     the introducing broker must show its name on all client account contracts,
                                         statements, correspondence and other documents, and
                                 (II)    the introducing broker must provide an annual written disclosure to each of its
                                         clients whose accounts are carried by a carrying broker outline the relationship
                                         between:
                                         (A)     the introducing broker and the carrying broker, and
                                         (B)     the client and the carrying broker.
                                 However, if the name and role of each of the introducing broker and the carrying
                                 broker is shown on all contracts, statements, correspondence and other documents,
                                 the annual disclosure under paragraph 2420(15)(i)(b)(II) is not required.
         (16) Clients introduced to the carrying broker
                 (i)     A client introduced to the carrying broker by the introducing broker must be considered a
                         client of both the introducing broker and the carrying broker for the purposes of
                         compliance with Corporation requirements.
         (17) Compliance with non-financial requirements
                 (i)     For each account it introduces to the carrying broker, the introducing broker is responsible
                         for compliance with all non-financial Corporation requirements unless stated otherwise in
                         this section.
         (18) Handling client cash
                 (i)     The introducing broker may accept or handle client funds in the form of money.
                 (ii)    An introducing broker may facilitate transactions for a client account carried by a carrying
                         broker by accepting client cheques:
                         (a)     in the introducing broker’s name, and depositing those cheques in a bank account in
                                 the introducing broker’s name for eventual deposit to an account in the carrying
                                 broker’s name, or
                         (b)     in the carrying broker’s name for deposit directly into a bank account in the carrying
                                 broker’s name.

Series 2000 | Dealer Member Organization and Individual Approval Rules                                              Rule 2400
                                                                         Investment Dealer and Partially Consolidated Rules

         (19) Reporting of introducing broker principal positions
                 (i)     The introducing broker must report all its principal positions carried by a carrying broker as
                         inventory on its Form 1 and Monthly Financial Report.
                 (ii)    The carrying broker must report the balance of the principal trading account the
                         introducing broker has with the carrying broker on its Form 1 and Monthly Financial Report.
2421. – 2424. Reserved.

PART A.5 - SPECIFIC REQUIREMENTS FOR TYPE 4 INTRODUCING BROKER / CARRYING BROKER
           ARRANGEMENTS
2425. Type 4 introducing broker/carrying broker arrangement – requirements
         The parties to a Type 4 introducing broker / carrying broker arrangement between two Dealer Members
         must comply with the following requirements:
         (1)     Minimum capital requirement
                 (i)     The introducing broker must maintain at all times minimum capital of $250,000 for the
                         purposes of calculating risk adjusted capital.
         (2)     Margin requirements to be provided by the introducing broker
                 (i)     The introducing broker must maintain the required margin:
                         (a)     for principal business it introduces to the carrying broker, and
                         (b)     for client business it introduces to the carrying broker.
         (3)     Margin requirements to be provided by the carrying broker
                 (i)     The carrying broker must maintain the required margin for any settlement date equity
                         deficiency amounts relating to the principal business it carries for the introducing broker in
                         accordance with the margin requirements for an account with another regulated entity, as
                         set out in Note 4 of the Notes and Instructions to Schedule 5 of Form 1.
         (4)     Offsets of carrying broker margin requirements against deposits
                 (i)     The carrying broker may reduce any margin it is required to provide under subsection
                         2425(3) by the lesser of the following amounts:
                         (a)     the margin requirement, and
                         (b)     the loan value of any introducing broker deposits held by the carrying broker.
                         Where a reduction is taken, the carrying broker must promptly notify the introducing
                         broker.
         (5)     Reporting client balances
                 (i)     When calculating risk adjusted capital, the introducing broker must report on Statement A
                         and Schedule 4 of Form 1 and the Monthly Financial Report all client accounts introduced
                         to the carrying broker. The carrying broker must not report those accounts.
                 (ii)    The carrying broker must report on its Form 1 and Monthly Financial Report one balance
                         owing to or from the introducing broker, representing client accounts it carries for the
                         introducing broker.



Series 2000 | Dealer Member Organization and Individual Approval Rules                                              Rule 2400
                                                                         Investment Dealer and Partially Consolidated Rules

                 (iii)   Although the carrying broker reports just one balance, its obligations and liabilities to each
                         client whose account it carries for the introducing broker are not released, discharged,
                         limited, or otherwise affected.
         (6)     Net client balances / funding
                 (i)     The introducing broker must meet financing requirements for client accounts it introduces
                         to the carrying broker.
         (7)     Deposits provided to the carrying broker by the introducing broker
                 (i)     The carrying broker must:
                         (a)     segregate security deposits provided by the introducing broker,
                         (b)     hold cash deposits in a separate bank account in trust for the introducing broker, and
                         (c)     report all deposits it receives from the introducing broker as a liability on its Form 1
                                 and Monthly Financial Report.
                 (ii)    The introducing broker must:
                         (a)     report as a non-allowable asset on the introducing broker’s Form 1 and Monthly
                                 Financial Report any portion of a deposit that a carrying broker has used to offset its
                                 margin requirements under subsection 2425(4), and
                         (b)     report as an allowable asset on the introducing broker’s Form 1 and Monthly
                                 Financial Report any remaining deposits not classified as a non-allowable asset under
                                 sub-clause 2425(7)(ii)(a).
         (8)     Concentration calculations
                 (i)     When completing the concentration calculations in Schedules 9 and 12 of Form 1, the
                         introducing broker must include, and the carrying broker must not include, all client
                         positions the carrying broker maintains for the introducing broker.
         (9)     Segregating client securities
                 (i)     The carrying broker must segregate securities for clients introduced by the introducing
                         broker in accordance with Corporation requirements relating to segregation.
         (10) Free credit segregation
                 (i)     The introducing broker must segregate free credits for client accounts it introduces to the
                         carrying broker in accordance with Corporation requirements including, but not limited to,
                         Statement D of Form 1.
         (11) Insurance coverage requirements of the introducing broker
                 (i)     The introducing broker must:
                         (a)     include all accounts introduced to the carrying broker:
                                 (I)     when calculating client net equity for the purposes of determining minimum
                                         Financial Institution Bond insurance coverage levels under section 4457, and
                                 (II)    when determining adequate insurance coverage levels for registered mail
                                         under section 4455,
                         (b)     maintain Financial Institution Bond insurance coverage for the types of losses
                                 specified under section 4456 and in the amounts that meet the minimum coverage
                                 levels specified in section 4457, and
Series 2000 | Dealer Member Organization and Individual Approval Rules                                              Rule 2400
                                                                         Investment Dealer and Partially Consolidated Rules

                         (c)     maintain adequate insurance for registered mail specified under section 4455.
         (12) Insurance coverage requirements of the carrying broker
                 (i)     The carrying broker must:
                         (a)     include all accounts it carries for the introducing broker:
                                 (I)     when calculating client net equity for the purposes of determining minimum
                                         Financial Institution Bond insurance coverage levels under section 4457, and
                                 (II)    when determining adequate insurance coverage levels for registered mail
                                         under section 4455,
                         (b)     maintain Financial Institution Bond insurance coverage for the types of losses
                                 specified under section 4456 and in the amounts that meet the minimum coverage
                                 levels specified in section 4457, and
                         (c)     maintain adequate insurance for registered mail specified under section 4455.
         (13) Client account opening required disclosure
                 (i)     At the time of opening a client account the introducing broker must advise the client of:
                         (a)     its relationship to the carrying broker, and
                         (b)     the client’s relationship to the carrying broker.
         (14) Parties to margin and guarantee documents
                 (i)     The introducing broker and the carrying broker or the introducing broker itself, may be
                         party to any margin agreements and guarantee documents.
                 (ii)    Where the margin agreements or guarantee documents are only executed between the
                         introducing broker and the client, the introducing broker / carrying broker agreement must
                         provide that the carrying broker may protect its interest in unpaid securities of the
                         introducing broker when the introducing broker becomes insolvent, bankrupt, or ceases to
                         be a Dealer Member.
         (15) Disclosure on contracts, statements and correspondence
                 (i)     The introducing broker must provide either ongoing or annual disclosure of its introducing
                         broker / carrying broker relationship to clients as follows:
                         (a)     where the introducing broker elects to provide ongoing relationship disclosure, the
                                 introducing broker and carrying broker must both show their names and roles on all
                                 client account contracts, statements, correspondence and other documents. Because
                                 of this ongoing disclosure, annual disclosure of the introducing broker / carrying
                                 broker relationship is not required, or
                         (b)     where the introducing broker elects to provide annual relationship disclosure:
                                 (I)     the introducing broker must show its name on all client account contracts,
                                         statements, correspondence and other documents,
                                 (II)    the introducing broker must provide an annual written disclosure to each of its
                                         clients whose accounts are carried by a carrying broker outlining the
                                         relationship between:
                                         (A)     the introducing broker and the carrying broker, and
                                         (B)     the client and the carrying broker.

Series 2000 | Dealer Member Organization and Individual Approval Rules                                              Rule 2400
                                                                         Investment Dealer and Partially Consolidated Rules

                                 However, if the name and role of each of the introducing broker and the carrying
                                 broker is shown on all contracts, statements, correspondence and other documents,
                                 the annual disclosure under paragraph 2425(15)(i)(b)(II) is not required.
         (16) Clients introduced to the carrying broker
                 (i)     A client introduced to the carrying broker by the introducing broker must be considered a
                         client of both the introducing broker and the carrying broker for the purposes of
                         compliance with Corporation requirements.
         (17) Compliance with non-financial requirements
                 (i)     For each account it introduces to the carrying broker, the introducing broker is responsible
                         for compliance with all non-financial Corporation requirements unless stated otherwise in
                         this section.
         (18) Handling client cash
                 (i)     The introducing broker may accept or handle client funds in the form of money.
                 (ii)    An introducing broker may facilitate transactions for a client account carried by a carrying
                         broker by accepting client cheques:
                         (a)     in the introducing broker’s name, and depositing those cheques in a bank account in
                                 the introducing broker’s name for eventual deposit to an account in the carrying
                                 broker’s name, or
                         (b)     in the carrying broker’s name for deposit directly into a bank account in the carrying
                                 broker’s name.
         (19) Reporting of introducing broker principal positions
                 (i)     The introducing broker must report all its principal positions carried by a carrying broker as
                         inventory on its Form 1 and Monthly Financial Report.
                 (ii)    The carrying broker must report the balance of the principal trading account the
                         introducing broker has with the carrying broker on its Form 1 and Monthly Financial Report.
2426. – 2429. Reserved.

PART B – REQUIREMENTS FOR ACCEPTABLE ARRANGEMENTS BETWEEN A DEALER MEMBER AND A MUTUAL
         FUND DEALER

2430. Arrangements between investment dealers and mutual fund dealers
         (1)     A Dealer Member may carry accounts for a Mutual Fund Dealer Member provided that:
                 (i)     the Dealer Member and the Mutual Fund Dealer Member shall enter into a written
                         introducing broker / carrying broker agreement evidencing the arrangement and reflecting
                         the requirements of section 2431 and such other matters as may be required by the
                         Corporation,
                 (ii)    the arrangement (including the form of agreement referred to in section 2431) and any
                         amendment to or termination of the arrangement or agreement, shall have been approved
                         by the Corporation before it is to become effective; and



Series 2000 | Dealer Member Organization and Individual Approval Rules                                              Rule 2400
                                                                         Investment Dealer and Partially Consolidated Rules

                 (iii)   the arrangement shall be in compliance with the Corporation’s Investment Dealer and
                         Partially Consolidated Rules, Mutual Fund Dealer Rules and Universal Market Integrity
                         Rules and securities laws applicable to the introducing and carrying dealer or, where for a
                         particular activity the introducing broker or carrying broker cannot comply with the
                         requirements applicable to them, the introducing broker and carrying broker must request
                         exemptive relief from the Corporation that specifies the manner in which the activity must
                         be performed.

2431. Requirements that apply to each party involved in the arangement
         (1)     A Dealer Member may enter into an agreement with a Mutual Fund Dealer Member in
                 accordance with section 2430 if it satisfies the following requirements:
                 (i)     For activities performed by the carrying broker on the introducing broker’s behalf:
                         (a)     the carrying broker will be subject to and must comply with the applicable rule
                                 requirements within the Corporation’s Investment Dealer and Partially Consolidated
                                 Rules and Universal Market Integrity Rules,
                         (b)     the carrying broker must perform these activities in a manner that does not interfere
                                 with the introducing broker’s ability to meet its compliance obligations under sub-
                                 clause 2431(1)(ii)(a), and
                         (c)     both the introducing broker and the carrying broker retain joint responsibility for:
                                 (I)     the proper performance of the activities, and
                                 (II)    compliance with the applicable rules.
                 (ii)    For activities other than those performed by the carrying broker on the introducing broker’s
                         behalf:
                         (a)     the introducing broker will be subject to and must comply with the Corporation’s
                                 Mutual Fund Dealer Rules,
                         (b)     the introducing broker must perform these activities in a manner that does not
                                 interfere with the carrying broker’s ability to meet its compliance obligations under
                                 sub-clause 2431(1)(i)(a), and
                         (c)     the introducing broker retains sole responsibility for:
                                 (I)     the proper performance of the activities, and
                                 (II)    compliance with the applicable rules.
2432. - 2434. Reserved.

PART C - ARRANGEMENTS BETWEEN A DEALER MEMBER AND A FOREIGN AFFILIATE DEALER
2435. Arrangements that may be executed with a foreign affiliate
         (1)     A Dealer Member may carry the client accounts of its foreign affiliate dealer if:
                 (i)     the Dealer Member enters into an introducing broker / carrying broker agreement type that
                         is permissible pursuant to sections 2403 through 2425 to be entered into between two
                         Dealer Members,




Series 2000 | Dealer Member Organization and Individual Approval Rules                                              Rule 2400
                                                                         Investment Dealer and Partially Consolidated Rules

                 (ii)    the Dealer Member complies with the applicable conditions and requirements that apply to
                         introducing broker / carrying broker agreement type set out in sections 2403 through 2425,
                         including the requirement to enter into a written agreement,
                 (iii)   the written agreement is:
                         (a)     in a form acceptable to the Corporation,
                         (b)     specifies the type of arrangement being entered into is a Type 1, Type 2, Type 3 or
                                 Type 4 introducing broker/carrying broker arrangement,
                         (c)     includes terms that comply with the requirements of sections 2401 through 2480
                                 that apply to the type of arrangement being entered into, and
                         (d)     approved by the Corporation in advance of it coming into effect,
                 and,
                 (iv)    the Dealer Member complies with the additional conditions set out in section 2436.
2436. Additional conditions that apply to an introducing broker / carrying broker arrangement involving a
      foreign affiliate dealer
         The parties to an introducing broker / carrying broker arrangement between a Dealer Member and its
         foreign affiliate dealer must comply with the following conditions and requirements:
         (1)     Annual disclosure requirement
                 (i)     The foreign affiliate, at least annually, must provide written disclosure in a form
                         satisfactory to the Corporation, to each of its clients whose accounts are carried by the
                         Dealer Member outlining:
                         (a)     the relationship between the Dealer Member and its foreign affiliate,
                         (b)     the relationship between the Dealer Member and the foreign affiliate’s client, and
                         (c)     any Investor Protection Fund coverage limitations on those client accounts.
         (2)     Foreign jurisdiction approval
                 (i)     The Dealer Member must provide written approval of the arrangement between the Dealer
                         Member and its foreign affiliate from the foreign affiliate’s regulatory authority.
         (3)     Responsibility for compliance
                 (i)     The Dealer Member’s foreign affiliate is not required to comply with Corporation
                         requirements solely because of the arrangement.
         (4)     Reporting balances
                 (i)     When calculating risk adjusted capital the Dealer Member must report on Statement A and
                         Schedule 4 of Form 1 and the Monthly Financial Report one balance owing to or from its
                         foreign affiliate representing the accounts of the clients it carries on behalf of its foreign
                         affiliate.
         (5)     Segregating securities
                 (i)     The Dealer Member must segregate securities it holds for its foreign affiliate’s clients in
                         accordance with Corporation requirements relating to segregation.




Series 2000 | Dealer Member Organization and Individual Approval Rules                                              Rule 2400
                                                                         Investment Dealer and Partially Consolidated Rules

         (6)     Insurance
                 (i)     The Dealer Member must include all accounts introduced to it by its foreign affiliate when
                         calculating client net equity for minimum Financial Institution Bond coverage under section
                         4457 and 4458.
2437. – 2459. Reserved.

PART D - PERMITTED ARRANGEMENTS THAT ARE NOT CONSIDERED TO BE INTRODUCING BROKER/CARRYING
         BROKER ARRANGEMENTS
2460. Certain arrangements executed with a Canadian financial institution affiliate
         (1)     A Dealer Member’s arrangement under which employees of its affiliate handle securities clearing
                 and settlement, maintain records, or perform operational functions is not considered an
                 introducing / carrying broker arrangement for the purposes of sections 2401 through 2480
                 provided the custodial functions are handled on a segregated basis according to Corporation
                 requirements and the affiliate is:
                 (i)     a chartered bank,
                 (ii)    an insurance company governed by federal or provincial insurance legislation, or
                 (iii)   a loan or trust company governed by federal or provincial loan and trust company
                         legislation.
2461. Certain arrangements with other dealers
         (1)     A Dealer Member’s clearing arrangement under which it acts as the clearing broker for another
                 dealer is permitted and is not considered an introducing broker / carrying broker arrangement for
                 the purposes of sections 2401 through 2480, provided that the arrangement also qualifies as a
                 clearing arrangement under the rules of the relevant exchange or self-regulatory organization in
                 the jurisdiction of the other dealer.
2462. – 2479. Reserved.

PART E - PROHIBITED BACK OFFICE SHARING ARRANGEMENTS
2480. Prohibited introducing broker / carrying broker arrangements
         (1)     A Dealer Member must not enter into an introducing broker / carrying broker arrangement with
                 any person except with:
                 (i)     another Dealer Member, in accordance with the requirements in sections 2403 through
                         2425,
                 (ii)    a Mutual Fund Dealer Member, in accordance with the requirements in sections 2430 and
                         2431, or
                 (ii)    a foreign affiliate dealer, in accordance with the requirements in sections 2435 and 2436.
2481. – 2499. Reserved.




Series 2000 | Dealer Member Organization and Individual Approval Rules                                              Rule 2400
                                                                         Investment Dealer and Partially Consolidated Rules

RULE 2500 | DEALER MEMBER DIRECTORS AND EXECUTIVES, AND APPROVAL OF INDIVIDUALS

2501. Introduction
         (1)     Rule 2500 sets out requirements for a Dealer Member’s Approved Persons.
         (2)     Rule 2500 is divided into the following parts:
                 Part A – Dealer Member Directors and Executives
                                [sections 2502 through 2507]
                 Part B – Approval of individuals
                                [sections 2550 through 2555]

PART A - DEALER MEMBER DIRECTORS AND EXECUTIVES
2502. General requirements for Directors
         (1)     No individual may become a member of the board of directors of a Dealer Member unless that
                 individual has been approved as a Director by the Corporation.
         (2)     At least 40% of the Dealer Member’s Directors must:
                  (i)     either:
                          (a)     be actively engaged in the business of the Dealer Member and spend the majority of
                                  their time in the securities or derivatives industry, except those on active
                                  government service, or who for health reasons are prevented from such active
                                  engagement, or
                          (b)     occupy a position equivalent to an Executive or a Director at a related or affiliated
                                  firm registered with a securities regulatory authority, an affiliated foreign securities
                                  dealer or advisor, or an affiliated Canadian financial institution,
                  (ii)    satisfy the applicable proﬁciency requirements of subsection 2603(1), and
                  (iii)   have at least five years of experience in the financial services industry, or such lesser
                          period as may be acceptable to the Corporation.
         (3)     The remaining Directors who do not meet subsection 2502(2) must, if actively engaged in the
                 business of the Dealer Member or its related company, meet the applicable proﬁciency
                 requirements of subsection 2603(1).
2503. General requirements for Executives
         (1)     A Dealer Member’s Executives must:
                  (i)     be either:
                          (a)     actively engaged in the business of the Dealer Member and spend the majority of
                                  their time in the securities or derivatives industry, except those on active
                                  government service, or who for health reasons are prevented from such active
                                  engagement, or
                          (b)     occupy a position equivalent to an Executive or Director at a related or affiliated firm
                                  registered with a securities regulatory authority, affiliated foreign securities dealer
                                  or advisor, or an affiliated Canadian financial institution, and

Series 2000 | Dealer Member Organization and Individual Approval Rules                                              Rule 2500
                                                                         Investment Dealer and Partially Consolidated Rules

                  (ii)    satisfy the applicable proficiency requirements of subsection 2603(1).
         (2)     Notwithstanding the applicable proﬁciency requirements in subsection 2603(1), at least 60% of the
                 Dealer Member’s Executives must have at least five years of experience in the financial services
                 industry, or such lesser period as may be acceptable to the Corporation.
2504. Exemption
         (1)     The Corporation may grant an exemption from any requirement or part of a requirement in
                 sections 2502 or 2503 if it is satisfied that it would not harm the interests of the Dealer Member,
                 its clients, the public or the Corporation. The exemption may be on any terms and conditions that
                 the Corporation considers appropriate.
2505. Chief Financial Officer
         (1)     A Dealer Member must designate a Chief Financial Officer who must:
                  (i)     be designated as an Executive and meet the general requirements for Executives set out
                          in section 2503, and
                  (ii)    satisfy the applicable proficiency requirements of subsection 2603(1).
         (2)     The Chief Financial Officer need not be actively engaged in the business of the Dealer Member on
                 a full-time basis if appropriate for the Dealer Member’s business.
         (3)     When a Chief Financial Officer ceases to be approved in the applicable category, the Dealer
                 Member must either immediately:
                 (i)     designate a qualified individual as Chief Financial Officer, or
                 (ii)    with the Corporation’s prior approval, designate an Executive as acting Chief Financial
                         Officer.
         (4)     When an acting Chief Financial Officer is designated:
                (i)      that individual must satisfy the applicable proficiency requirements of subsection 2603(1)
                         and be designated as Chief Financial Officer, or
                (ii)     the Dealer Member must designate another qualified individual as Chief Financial Officer,
                  within 90 days of the previous Chief Financial Officer’s cessation date.
         (5)     Any Dealer Member that fails to have a qualified Chief Financial Officer within 90 days of the
                 cessation date of the previous Chief Financial Officer, or such other dates as the Corporation may
                 specify, will be liable for and pay to the Corporation such fees as the Board may prescribe from
                 time to time.
2506. Chief Compliance Officer
         (1)     A Dealer Member must designate a Chief Compliance Officer who must:
                 (i)     be designated as an Executive and meet the general requirements for Executives set out in
                         section 2503, and
                 (ii)    satisfy the applicable proficiency requirements of subsection 2603(1).
         (2)     The Chief Compliance Officer may be the Ultimate Designated Person, if approved by the
                 Corporation.


Series 2000 | Dealer Member Organization and Individual Approval Rules                                              Rule 2500
                                                                         Investment Dealer and Partially Consolidated Rules

         (3)     A Dealer Member may designate additional Chief Compliance Officers to be responsible for
                 separate business units of the Dealer Member, if the Dealer Member has obtained the prior
                 approval of the Corporation and any other applicable securities regulatory authority.
         (4)     When a Chief Compliance Officer ceases to be approved in the applicable category, the Dealer
                 Member must either immediately:
                 (i)      designate a qualified individual as Chief Compliance Officer, or
                 (ii)     with the Corporation’s prior approval, designate an Executive as acting Chief Compliance
                          Officer.
         (5)     When an acting Chief Compliance Officer is designated:
                 (i)      the individual must satisfy the applicable proficiency requirements of subsection 2603(1)
                          and be designated as Chief Compliance Officer, or
                 (ii)     the Dealer Member must designate another qualified individual as Chief Compliance Officer,
                 within 90 days of the previous Chief Compliance Officer’s cessation date.
         (6)     Any Dealer Member that fails to have a qualified Chief Compliance Officer within 90 days of the
                 cessation date of the previous Chief Compliance Officer, or such other dates as the Corporation
                 may specify, will be liable for and pay to the Corporation such fees as the Board may prescribe
                 from time to time.
2507. Ultimate Designated Person
         (1)     A Dealer Member must designate an Ultimate Designated Person who must be designated as an
                 Executive and meet the applicable proﬁciency requirements in subsection 2603(1) and the
                 general requirements for Executives set out in section 2503.
         (2)     The Ultimate Designated Person must be:
                  (i)     the chief executive officer of the Dealer Member or, an Executive acting in a capacity
                          similar to a chief executive officer, provided it is acceptable to the Corporation, and
                          applicable relief is granted under the applicable National Instrument,
                  (ii)    the sole proprietor of the Dealer Member, or
                  (iii)   the Executive in charge of a division of the Dealer Member, if the activity that requires the
                          Dealer Member to register occurs only within the division and the Dealer Member has
                          significant other business activities.
         (3)     A Dealer Member may designate additional Ultimate Designated Persons to be responsible for
                 separate business units, with the prior approval of the Corporation and any other applicable
                 securities regulatory authority.
         (4)     If an individual who is approved as a Dealer Member’s Ultimate Designated Person ceases to
                 meet any of the conditions listed in subsections 2507(1) and 2507(2), the Dealer Member must
                 immediately designate another qualified Executive to act as its Ultimate Designated Person or if
                 unable to do so, promptly notify the Corporation of its plan to designate another qualified
                 Executive as its Ultimate Designated Person.




Series 2000 | Dealer Member Organization and Individual Approval Rules                                              Rule 2500
                                                                         Investment Dealer and Partially Consolidated Rules

2508. – 2549. Reserved.

PART B - APPROVAL OF INDIVIDUALS
2550. Introduction
         (1)     Part B of Rule 2500 sets out the approval criteria for Approved Persons.
         (2)     Part B of Rule 2500 requirements are complementary to section 9204, which discuss individual
                 approval applications.
2551. Individual approval
         (1)     An individual is not permitted to act as an Approved Person and a Dealer Member is not
                 permitted to allow an individual to act as an Approved Person unless:
                  (i)     the Dealer Member is registered (or exempt from such registration) in the appropriate
                          category under securities laws in each jurisdiction in which clients of the Dealer Member
                          reside or in which the Dealer Member carries on securities and derivatives related
                          business,
                  (ii)    the individual, if required to do so under securities laws, is registered (or exempt from
                          such registration) in the appropriate category under securities laws in each jurisdiction in
                          which clients of the individual reside or in which the individual carries on securities and
                          derivatives related business, and
                  (iii)   the individual is approved by the Corporation in the appropriate Approved Person
                          category, before the individual begins working in that role. In the case of a Registered
                          Representative dealing in mutual funds only who is an employee of a firm registered as
                          both an investment dealer and a mutual fund dealer, such approval will be automatic
                          upon the individual’s registration as a Mutual Fund Dealer - Dealing Representative.
         (2)     Only a Dealer Member’s director, partner, officer or employee can be an Approved Person.
         (3)     A Dealer Member must ensure that each Approved Person at the Dealer Member complies with
                 Corporation requirements applicable to that individual’s Approved Person category.
         (4)     All Approved Persons are subject to Corporation jurisdiction and must comply with Corporation
                 requirements.
         (5)     A Dealer Member must ensure that, when dealing with the public, its Approved Persons use titles
                 and designations that accurately indicate:
                 (i)      the type of business that they have been approved by the Corporation to conduct, and
                 (ii)     the role that they carry out or has been approved by the Corporation to carry out.
         (6)     If an Approved Person ceases to be approved, the former Approved Person must immediately
                 cease any activity requiring Corporation approval.
         (7)     Except as set out in subsection 2551(8), an Approved Person must not accept, nor allow an
                 associate to accept, directly or indirectly, any remuneration, gratuity, benefit or other
                 consideration from any person other than the Dealer Member, its related companies, or affiliates
                 for any Dealer Member related activities carried out by the Approved Person.
         (8)     Where an individual:

Series 2000 | Dealer Member Organization and Individual Approval Rules                                              Rule 2500
                                                                         Investment Dealer and Partially Consolidated Rules

                 (i)     is approved as a Registered Representative dealing in mutual funds only pursuant to
                         subsection 2605(3), and
                 (ii)    acts as an agent of a Dealer Member in compliance with the requirements set out in Rule
                         2300,
                 any remuneration, gratuity, benefit or other consideration in respect of business conducted by
                 the individual on behalf of the Dealer Member may be paid by the Dealer Member to a
                 corporation that is not registered under securities laws provided:
                 (iii)   the arrangement is not prohibited or otherwise limited by the relevant securities laws or
                         securities regulatory authorities,
                 (iv)    the corporation is incorporated under the laws of Canada or a province or territory of
                         Canada, and
                 (v)     the individual, Dealer Member and the unregistered corporation have entered into a
                         written agreement, in a form prescribed by the Corporation, the terms of which provide
                         that:
                         (a)     the individual and Dealer Member have the same:
                                 (I)     obligations to comply with applicable Corporation requirements and securities
                                         laws, and
                                 (II)    liabilities to third parties, including clients
                                 irrespective of the method by which any remuneration, gratuity, benefit or other
                                 consideration is disbursed,
                         (b)     the Dealer Member shall engage in appropriate supervision with respect to the
                                 conduct of the individual and the unregistered corporation to ensure compliance
                                 with the requirements in sub-clause 2551(8)(v)(a) and all other appliable Corporation
                                 requirements, and
                         (c)     the individual and the unregistered corporation shall provide the Dealer Member, the
                                 Corporation and the applicable securities regulatory authorities with access to all
                                 books and records maintained by or on behalf of either of them for the purpose of
                                 ensuring compliance with the Corporation requirements and securities laws.
         (9)     Subsection 2551(8) does not apply in respect of any remuneration, gratuity, benefit or other
                 consideration derived from a client in Alberta.
2552. Compliance with the proficiency requirements or other conditions
         (1)     Each Approved Person must:
                 (i)     meet the applicable pre-approval proﬁciency requirements set out in sections 2603 and 2605
                         before Corporation approval is granted, and
                 (ii)    complete the applicable post-approval proficiency requirements of sections 2604 and 2605
                         after receiving Corporation approval.
         (2)     The Corporation will automatically suspend an Approved Person if they do not complete the
                 applicable post-approval proﬁciency requirements in the Approved Persons category as set out in
                 clauses 2604(1)(i), 2604(2)(i), 2604(2)(ii), subsections 2605(1), 2605(2), or section 2630.


Series 2000 | Dealer Member Organization and Individual Approval Rules                                              Rule 2500
                                                                         Investment Dealer and Partially Consolidated Rules

         (3)     The Corporation will reinstate an Approved Person once they have completed the required post-
                 approval proficiency requirements and the Corporation has been notified.
         (4)     A Dealer Member must file a report specified by the Corporation on the conditions imposed on an
                 Approved Person under Rule 8200 or Rule 9200 within 10 business days of the end of each month.
         (5)     If a Dealer Member does not file the report specified in subsection 2552(4) or files the report late,
                 it must pay the Corporation the applicable late filing fee.
2553. Approval of Registered Representatives, Investment Representatives, Portfolio Managers and
      Associate Portfolio Managers and their obligations
         (1)     A Portfolio Manager and Associate Portfolio Manager is also permitted to conduct activities
                 carried on by a Registered Representative in accordance with Corporation requirements
                 applicable to Registered Representatives.
         (2)     An Associate Portfolio Manager must not advise on securities unless, before giving the advice, the
                 advice has been pre-approved by a Portfolio Manager.(3) A Registered Representative,
                 Investment Representative, Portfolio Manager or Associate Portfolio Manager may not conduct
                 on behalf of a Dealer Member, and a Dealer Member may not permit the Approved Person to
                 conduct on its behalf, the type of business as set out in clause 2553(3)(iv) and deal with a type of
                 customer as set out in clauses 2553(3)(i) and (ii), unless the Dealer Member complies with the
                 following:
                 (i)     The Dealer Member must notify the Corporation, and seek the Corporation’s prior approval
                         on whether the Registered Representative, Investment Representative, Portfolio Manager
                         or Associate Portfolio Manager will deal with either retail clients or institutional clients.
                 (ii)    A Registered Representative dealing with:
                         (a)     retail clients, may take orders from, or give advice to, all types of clients, or
                         (b)     institutional clients, may take orders from, or give advice to, institutional clients only.
                 (iii)   An Investment Representative dealing with:
                         (a)     retail clients, may take orders from all types of clients, or
                         (b)     institutional clients, may take orders from institutional clients only.
                 (iv)    The Dealer Member must notify the Corporation which of its individuals approved as a
                         Registered Representative, Investment Representative, Portfolio Manager or Associate
                         Portfolio Manager will deal in or advise in:
                         (a)     only mutual funds, government or government-guaranteed debt instruments, and
                                 deposit instruments issued by a federally regulated bank, trust company, credit union
                                 or caisse populaire, except those for which all or part of the interest or return is
                                 indexed to the performance of another financial instrument or index,
                         (b)     derivatives subject to the limitations set out in subsection 2625(3), and
                         (c)     general securities business; including equities, ﬁxed income and other
                                 investment products not listed above.
         (4)     An individual applying for approval as a Registered Representative or Investment Representative
                 dealing only in mutual funds must comply with the applicable proficiency requirements in
                 subsections 2605(1), 2605(2) or 2605(3).

Series 2000 | Dealer Member Organization and Individual Approval Rules                                               Rule 2500
                                                                         Investment Dealer and Partially Consolidated Rules

         (5) The post-approval proficiency requirements in subsections 2605(1) or 2605(2) do not apply to a
             Registered Representative or Investment Representative approved prior to September 28, 2009
             and registered in provinces or territories which allowed the individual to be restricted to only
             mutual funds, provided they remain in the same restricted category of approval in the same
             provinces/territories.
         (6) The approval of an individual qualified to deal only in mutual funds is automatically suspended if
             the individual fails to satisfy the post-approval requirements in subsections 2605(1) or 2605(2) in
             accordance with subsections 2552(2) and 2552(3).
2554. The Approved Person’s activities outside of the Dealer Member
         (1)     An Approved Person may have, and continue in, an activity outside of the Dealer Member, if the
                 outside activity:
                 (i)     is not contrary to securities laws or Corporation requirements, and
                 (ii)    does not bring the securities industry into disrepute.
         (2)     An Approved Person may have, and continue in, an outside activity, if:
                 (i)     the Approved Person informs the Dealer Member of the outside activity,
                 (ii)    the Approved Person obtains the Dealer Member’s prior approval to engage in the outside
                         activity,
                 (iii)   the Dealer Member’s policies and procedures specifically address:
                         (a)     continuous service to clients, and
                         (b)     potential conflicts of interest,
                 and,
                 (iv)    the Dealer Member notifies the Corporation of the outside activity within the time period
                         and manner required by National Instrument 33-109.
          (3)     An individual must not act, and a Dealer Member must not permit an individual to act, as a
                  Registered Representative, Investment Representative, Portfolio Manager, Associate Portfolio
                  Manager or Trader in a manner that is contrary to section 4.1 of National Instrument 31-103,
                  unless an exemption is granted by the applicable securities regulatory authority and such similar
                  exemption request is also filed with and approved by the Corporation.
2555. Approval of investors
         (1)     Any investor who owns or holds a beneficial ownership interest in a significant equity interest in
                 the Dealer Member or special warrants or other securities that are convertible into a significant
                 equity interest in the Dealer Member must:
                 (i)     be approved by the Corporation, and
                 (ii)    if applicable, meet the proficiency requirements of subsections 2555(2) and 2555(3).
         (2)     A Dealer Member’s Director who, directly or indirectly, owns or controls a voting interest of a
                 Dealer Member of 10% or more must satisfy the proficiency requirements of sub-clause
                 2603(1)(i)(j).
         (3)     Any individual, other than a Dealer Member’s Director, who:

Series 2000 | Dealer Member Organization and Individual Approval Rules                                              Rule 2500
                                                                         Investment Dealer and Partially Consolidated Rules

                 (i)     is actively engaged in the business of the Dealer Member, and
                 (ii)    directly or indirectly owns or controls a voting interest in a Dealer Member of 10% or more,
                 must satisfy the proficiency requirements of sub-clause 2603(1)(i)(j).
2556. – 2599. Reserved.




Series 2000 | Dealer Member Organization and Individual Approval Rules                                              Rule 2500
                                                                         Investment Dealer and Partially Consolidated Rules

RULE 2600 | PROFICIENCY REQUIREMENTS AND EXEMPTIONS FROM PROFICIENCIES

2601. Introduction
         (1)     Rule 2600 sets out the minimum proficiency requirements for individuals requiring Corporation
                 approval. The requirements are designed to ensure that Approved Persons are qualified to
                 perform their job functions competently in order to meet their regulatory obligations and that a
                 Dealer Member’s business is conducted with integrity.
         (2)     Rule 2600 is divided into the following parts:
                 Part A – Proficiency requirements
                               [sections 2602 and 2605]
                 Part B – Exemptions from proficiency requirements
                               [sections 2625 through 2628]
                 Part C – Transition provisions
                               [sections 2629 and 2630]

PART A - PROFICIENCY REQUIREMENTS
2602. Proﬁciency principle
          (1)     An Approved Person must not perform an activity that requires approval unless the Approved
                  Person has satisﬁed the applicable proﬁciency requirements set out in Rule 2600 and has the
                  education, experience and training that a reasonable person would consider necessary to
                  perform the activity competently, including understanding the structure, features and risks of
                  each security, derivative and precious metals bullion the Approved Person deals with,
                  recommends or supervises.
          (2)     The Dealer Member must ensure that an individual does not perform an activity that requires
                  Corporation approval unless the individual has satisﬁed the applicable proﬁciency requirements
                  set out in Rule 2600 and has the education, experience and training that a reasonable person
                  would consider necessary to perform the activity competently, including understanding the
                  structure, features and risks of each security, derivative and precious metals bullion, the
                  individual deals with, recommends or supervises.

2603. Proﬁciency requirements prior to approval
         (1)     Each applicant in an Approved Person category must meet the applicable proﬁciency
                 requirements prescribed below before the Corporation will grant approval, unless an
                 exemption has been granted from the applicable requirements:
                 (i)     An applicant for approval, who is eligible to complete a prescribed exam, must at a
                         minimum successfully complete the following before the Corporation will grant approval in
                         the following categories:
                         (a)     Investment Representative dealing with securities: Canadian Investment Regulatory
                                 Exam
                         (b)     Investment Representative dealing with derivatives: Canadian Investment Regulatory
                                 Exam and Derivatives Exam,

Series 2000 | Dealer Member Organization and Individual Approval Rules                                               Rule 2600
                                                                         Investment Dealer and Partially Consolidated Rules

                         (c)     Registered Representative (retail) dealing with securities: Canadian Investment
                                 Regulatory Exam and Retail Securities Exam,
                         (d)     Registered Representative (retail) dealing with derivatives: Canadian Investment
                                 Regulatory Exam and Retail Securities Exam and Derivatives Exam,
                         (e)     Registered Representative (institutional) dealing with securities: Canadian Investment
                                 Regulatory Exam and Institutional Securities Exam,
                         (f)     Registered Representative (institutional) dealing with derivatives: Canadian
                                 Investment Regulatory Exam and Institutional Securities Exam and Derivatives Exam,
                         (g)     Associate Portfolio Manager: Level 1 of the Chartered Financial Analyst (CFA)
                                 program administered by the CFA Institute, or either the Canadian Investment
                                 Manager Designation or the Chartered Investment Manager Designation (CIM®)
                                 administered by CSI Global Education Inc., and
                                 (I)     If managing accounts with derivatives, the Derivatives Exam,
                         (h)     Portfolio Manager: a CFA Charter administered by the CFA Institute, or either
                                 the Canadian Investment Manager Designation or the Chartered Investment
                                 Manager Designation (CIM®) administered by CSI Global Education Inc., and
                                 (I)     If managing accounts with derivatives, the Derivatives Exam,
                         (i)     Supervisor: Supervisor Exam, and
                                 (I)     If supervising trading in, or accounts for those who trade in securities,
                                         derivatives, or managed accounts, the exam requirements applicable to the
                                         individuals being supervised listed in sub-clauses 2603(1)(i)(a) to (f), and (h)
                                         except:
                                         (A)     the Canadian Investment Regulatory Exam is not required if the
                                                 Supervisor satisﬁes the experience requirements in sub-clause
                                                 2603(1)(ii)(d),
                         (j)     Director, where required in section 2502: Director and Executive Exam,
                         (k)     Ultimate Designated Person and Executive other than those in sub-clause 2603(1)(i)(l)
                                 or (m): Director and Executive Exam,
                         (l)     Chief Compliance Oﬃcer: Chief Compliance Oﬃcer Exam,
                         (m)     Chief Financial Oﬃcer: Chief Financial Oﬃcer Exam,
                         (n)     Trader: Trader Exam in addition to any exam mandated by the applicable marketplace.
                 (ii)    An applicant for approval must have the following minimum education or experience before
                         the Corporation will grant approval in the following categories:
                         (a)     Registered Representative: A relevant diploma or degree from an accredited
                                 post secondary institution, or minimum four years of relevant experience
                                 acceptable to the Corporation,
                         (b)     Associate Portfolio Manager: Minimum two years of relevant investment
                                 management experience acceptable to the Corporation within three years
                                 prior to the date of application for approval,
                         (c)     Portfolio Manager:
                                 (I)     If Canadian Investment Manager Designation or Chartered Investment
Series 2000 | Dealer Member Organization and Individual Approval Rules                                                Rule 2600
                                                                         Investment Dealer and Partially Consolidated Rules

                                         Manager Designation (CIM®) is completed, at least four years of relevant
                                         investment management experience acceptable to the Corporation, of which
                                         one year was gained within the three years prior to the date of application for
                                         approval,
                                 (II)    If CFA Charter is completed, at least one year of relevant investment
                                         management experience acceptable to the Corporation within the three years
                                         prior to the date of application for approval,
                         (d)     Supervisor: Minimum two years of relevant experience acceptable to the Corporation,
                         (e)     Ultimate Designated Person and Executive: Minimum two years of relevant experience
                                 acceptable to the Corporation,
                         (f)     Chief Compliance Oﬃcer:
                                 (I)     Five years working for an investment dealer or registered advisor, or aﬃliated
                                         Financial Industry Regulatory Authority (FINRA) dealer, with at least three years
                                         in a compliance or supervisory capacity, or
                                 (II)    Three years providing professional services in the securities industry, with at
                                         least 12 months experience working at an investment dealer or registered
                                         advisor in a compliance or supervisory capacity,
                         (g)     Chief Financial Oﬃcer:
                                 (I)     A ﬁnancial accounting designation, ﬁnance related university degree or diploma
                                         or equivalent work experience as may be acceptable to the Corporation.
2604.    Post-approval proﬁciency requirements
         (1)     Dealer Member training
                 (i)     A Dealer Member must, as prescribed by the Corporation, provide training to its Registered
                         Representatives and Investment Representatives within 90 days after approval considering
                         the type of client and product the Approved Person will be dealing with, and
                         (a)     The Dealer Member must notify the Corporation of completion of the training within
                                 90 days after approval.
                 (ii)    A Dealer Member who sponsors an Approved Person must ensure that the individual has
                         received the appropriate training relevant for its business type including its client and
                         product type to ensure compliance with the proﬁciency principle in section 2602.
                         (a)     A Dealer Member may permit an Approved Person to apply on-going training to meet
                                 prescribed continuing education requirements.
                 (iii)   In addition to any training prescribed in Rule 2600, a Dealer Member must provide on-going
                         training to its Approved Persons on compliance with Corporation requirements, securities
                         laws, and applicable laws including, without limitation, the obligations relating to conﬂicts
                         of interest, know-your-client, account appropriateness, product due diligence, know-your-
                         product, and suitability determination.
                         (a)     A Dealer Member may permit an Approved Person to apply on-going training to meet
                                 prescribed continuing education requirements.
                 (iv)    The Dealer Member must keep a record of all training provided, as prescribed in Rule 2600,
                         and provide the record to the Corporation on request to demonstrate compliance with the

Series 2000 | Dealer Member Organization and Individual Approval Rules                                               Rule 2600
                                                                         Investment Dealer and Partially Consolidated Rules

                         proﬁciency principle.
         (2)     Conduct training
                 (i)     Each Approved Person must complete the conduct training prescribed by the Corporation
                         within 30 days after approval, and
                         (a)     The Dealer Member must notify the Corporation of completion of the training within 30
                                 days after approval.
                 (ii)    Each Approved Person not captured by (i), approved as of the date of these Rules, must
                         complete the conduct training prescribed by the Corporation by no later than December 31,
                         2026, and
                         (a)     The Dealer Member must notify the Corporation of completion of the training by no
                                 later than December 31, 2026.
2605.    Mutual funds only Registered Representatives and Investment Representatives
         (1)     An applicant for approval, or an individual approved as a Registered Representative dealing only in
                 mutual funds who is an employee of a ﬁrm registered as an investment dealer and not registered
                 as a mutual fund dealer must:
                 (i)     Complete any of the following prior to approval:
                         (a)     Requirements in sub-clause 2603(1)(i)(c),
                         (b)     The Canadian Securities Course administered by CSI Global Education Inc.,
                         (c)     Canadian Investment Funds Course administered by the IFSE Institute, or
                         (d)     Investment Funds in Canada Course administered by CSI Global Education Inc.
                 (ii)    Complete the requirements in sub-clause 2603(1)(i)(c) and clause 2604(2)(i) within 270 days
                         of approval.
                 (iii)   Complete the training requirement in clause 2604(1)(i) within 18 months after initial approval
                         date, notwithstanding the timeline set out in clause 2604(1)(i).
                 (iv)    Upgrade within 18 months of initial approval.
         (2)     An applicant for approval or an individual approved as an Investment Representative dealing only
                 in mutual funds who is an employee of a ﬁrm registered as an investment dealer and not
                 registered as a mutual fund dealer must:
                 (i)     Complete any of the following prior to approval:
                         (a)     Requirements in sub-clause 2603(1)(i)(a),
                         (b)     The Canadian Securities Course administered by CSI Global Education Inc.,
                         (c)     Canadian Investment Funds Course administered by the IFSE Institute, or
                         (d)     Investment Funds in Canada Course administered by CSI Global Education Inc.
                 (ii)    Complete the requirements in sub-clause 2603(1)(i)(a) and clause 2604(2)(i) within 270 days
                         of approval.
                 (iii)   Complete the training requirement in clause 2604(1)(i) within 18 months after initial
                         approval date, notwithstanding the timeline set out in clause 2604(1)(i).
                 (iv)    Upgrade within 18 months of initial approval.
         (3)     An applicant for approval, or an individual approved as a Registered Representative dealing only in
                 mutual funds who is an employee of a ﬁrm registered as both an investment dealer and a mutual
Series 2000 | Dealer Member Organization and Individual Approval Rules                                               Rule 2600
                                                                         Investment Dealer and Partially Consolidated Rules

                 fund dealer must:
                 (i)     Complete any of the following prior to approval:
                         (a)     The Canadian Securities Course administered by CSI Global Education Inc.,
                         (b)     Canadian Investment Funds Course administered by the IFSE Institute, or
                         (c)     Investment Funds in Canada Course administered by CSI Global Education Inc.
                 (ii)    Complete the training requirement in clause 2604(1)(i) within 90 days after initial approval
                         date.
         (4)     An applicant for approval, or an individual approved, as a Registered Representative dealing in
                 mutual funds only, or an Investment Representative dealing in mutual funds only, will be also
                 permitted to trade in exchange-traded funds that meet the deﬁnition of a mutual fund provided
                 the individual:
                 (i)     was permitted to trade in exchange-traded funds within the 90 days prior to these Rules
                         coming into eﬀect, or
                 (ii)    complies with the relevant proﬁciency requirements in subsections 2605(1), 2605(2) or
                         2605(3), and has successfully completed one of the following within the timeline prescribed
                         in subsection 2628(1):
                         (a)     the ETFs for Mutual Fund Representatives course administered by CSI Global
                                 Education Inc., or
                         (b)     the Exchange-Traded Funds Course administered by the IFSE Institute, or
                         (c)     the Exchange Traded Funds for Representatives of Mutual Fund Dealers course
                                 administered by the Smarten Up Institute.
         (5)     The following terms have the meaning set out below when used in subsection 2605(6):
                  “alternative mutual             The same meaning as the definition in National Instrument 81-102, Investment
                  fund”                           Funds.
                  “bridge course”                 Either:
                                                  (i) the Investing in Alternative Mutual Funds and Hedge Funds course
                                                      administered by the IFSE Institute, or
                                                  (ii) the Hedge Funds and Liquid Alternatives for Mutual Fund Representatives
                                                       course administered by CSI Global Education Inc.

         (6)     An applicant for approval, or an individual approved, as a Registered Representative dealing in
                 mutual funds only, or an Investment Representative dealing in mutual funds only, will be also
                 permitted to trade in alternative mutual funds provided the individual:
                 (i)     was permitted to trade in alternative mutual funds within the 90 days prior to these Rules
                         coming into eﬀect, or
                 (ii)    complies with the relevant proﬁciency requirements in subsections 2605(1), 2605(2) or
                         2605(3), and has successfully completed one of the following within the timeline prescribed
                         in subsection 2628(1):
                         (a)     the bridge course,
                         (b)     the Derivatives Fundamentals Course administered by CSI Global Education Inc.,
                         (c)     the Canadian Securities Course administered by CSI Global Education Inc., or

Series 2000 | Dealer Member Organization and Individual Approval Rules                                                   Rule 2600
                                                                         Investment Dealer and Partially Consolidated Rules

                         (d)     the courses required to be registered as a Portfolio Manager – Advising
                                 Representative pursuant to section 3.11 of National Instrument 31-103, Registration
                                 Requirements, Exemptions and Ongoing Registrant Obligations.
2606. – 2624. Reserved.

PART B - EXEMPTIONS FROM PROFICIENCY REQUIREMENTS
2625. Specific exemptions
         (1)     An applicant seeking approval as a Supervisor in relation to activities of individuals approved to
                 deal in mutual funds only, including those in subsection 2605(4) is exempt from the pre-approval
                 exam requirements in clause 2603(1)(i) provided the individual:
                 (i)     was designated by a member of the Mutual Fund Dealers Association of Canada as a
                         branch manager, within 90 days prior to these Rules coming into effect, or
                 (ii)    has successfully completed the following within the timelines prescribed in subsection
                         2628(1):
                         (a)     instead of the applicable requirements described in paragraph 2603(1)(i)(i)(I), either
                                 the:
                                 (I)     Canadian Investment Funds Course administered by the IFSE Institute, or
                                 (II)    Investment Funds in Canada Course administered by CSI Global Education Inc.
                         (b)     instead of the Supervisor Exam, either the:
                                 (I)     Mutual Fund Branch Managers’ Examination Course administered by the IFSE
                                         Institute, or
                                 (II)    Branch Compliance Officers Course administered by CSI Global Education Inc.
         (2)     Any individuals approved prior to December 31, 2025, are exempt from any new proﬁciency
                 requirements, other than the requirements in subsection 2604(2), introduced as of January 1,
                 2026, in Rule 2600, provided the Approved Person continues in the same role.
                 (i)     Notwithstanding subsection 2625(2), an applicant for approval is not required to complete
                         the Canadian Investment Regulatory Exam prescribed in subsection 2603(1) if the individual
                         has minimum two years of prior experience in the same Approved Person category within
                         three years prior to the date of application for approval and satisﬁes other prescribed
                         requirements under sections 2603 and 2604 for their category of approval.
         (3)     Any Approved Person who would be required to complete the Derivatives Exam under Rule 2600
                 pursuant to subsection 2603(1), and who is exempt from such requirement pursuant to
                 subsection 2625(2), may only deal in, as applicable, legacy options or futures contract, futures
                 contract options, and must ensure that the scope of their permitted activities are clear in all their
                 communication and in all their dealings.
2626. General and discretionary exemptions
         (1)     The Corporation may exempt any person or class of persons from any proficiency requirement, in
                 whole or in part, if the applicant demonstrates acceptable alternative experience, and/or
                 successful completion of alternative courses or examinations to the Corporation.



Series 2000 | Dealer Member Organization and Individual Approval Rules                                               Rule 2600
                                                                         Investment Dealer and Partially Consolidated Rules

         (2)     This exemption may be subject to any terms and conditions the Corporation considers
                 appropriate.
         (3)     The applicant must pay any fees prescribed by the Board for this exemption.
2627. Exemptions from completing the required exams
         (1)     An applicant for approval is exempt from writing the Canadian Investment Regulatory Exam if they
                 satisfy the following:
                 (i)     previously registered with FINRA in a similar capacity within three years prior to the date of
                         application for approval, and have completed the applicable FINRA requirements for that
                         registration category.
         (2)     An applicant for approval is exempt from writing the Derivatives Exam if they satisfy the following:
                 (i)     previously registered and dealing in options and futures with FINRA and the National Futures
                         Association (NFA) within three years prior to the date of application for approval, and
                 (ii)    completed the Series 3 and Series 7 exams oﬀered by FINRA.
         (3)     An applicant for approval is exempt from writing the Canadian Investment Regulatory Exam and
                 the Retail Securities Exam and Institutional Securities Exam if the applicant has satisﬁed the
                 requirements in sub-clauses 2603(1)(i)(g) or (h) applicable to Associate Portfolio Managers or
                 Portfolio Managers respectively.
2628. Exam validity
         (1)     An individual is deemed to have successfully completed an exam if:
                 (i)     the individual successfully completed the prescribed exam within three years prior to the
                         date of application for approval,
                 (ii)    the individual who successfully completed the prescribed exam was previously approved in
                         the same Approved Person category, or another category which required the same exam,
                         within three years prior to the date of application for approval, or
                 (iii)   the individual who successfully completed the prescribed exam gained one year of relevant
                         securities industry experience, acceptable to the Corporation, within three years prior to the
                         date of application for approval.
         (2)     For the purposes of determining exam validity, an Approved Person is not considered to have
                 been approved during any period in which the Approved Person’s approval was suspended or the
                 individual was otherwise not conducting any activities requiring Corporation approval on behalf
                 of the Dealer Member.
         (3)     The validity periods do not apply to the Canadian Investment Manager Designation, the
                 Chartered Investment Manager Designation (CIM®) and the CFA Charter provided the holders of
                 these designations continue to have the right to use the designation and the designation has not
                 been revoked or otherwise restricted.

PART C – TRANSITION PROVISIONS
2629. Transition from courses prescribed prior to January 1, 2026
         (1)     An individual is exempt from the requirements in section 2603 if all of the following apply:

Series 2000 | Dealer Member Organization and Individual Approval Rules                                               Rule 2600
                                                                         Investment Dealer and Partially Consolidated Rules

                 (i)     the individual enrolls in a course oﬀered by CSI Global Education Inc. prescribed under the
                         rules prior to January 1, 2026,
                 (ii)    the individual successfully completes the course and its exam prior to January 1, 2027,
                 (iii)   the individual would satisfy the proﬁciency requirements applicable to the same approval
                         category prior to January 1, 2026, upon completion of the course completed in clause (ii),
                         and
                 (iv)    the sponsoring Dealer Member submits an application for approval for the individual, prior
                         to January 1, 2027.
         (2)     If an individual is required to complete the Wealth Management Essentials (WME) course as of
                 December 31, 2025, the individual may complete either of the following:
                 (i)     WME by earlier of December 31, 2026, or the required completion date prescribed under
                         the rules that were in eﬀect prior to January 1, 2026, or
                 (ii)    Retail Securities Exam by the required completion date prescribed under the rules that were
                         in eﬀect prior to January 1, 2026.
2630. Transition of Advising Representatives and Associate Advising Representatives into the Portfolio
      Manager and Associate Portfolio Manager approval category
         (1)     An individual registered as an advising representative or associate advising representative
                 by a securities regulatory authority within the 90 days prior to the date of application as a
                 Portfolio Manager or Associate Portfolio Manager has 90 days after the date of approval
                 by the Corporation to complete the conduct training in clause 2604(2)(i), and
                 (i)     The Dealer Member must notify the Corporation of completion of the training within 90 days
                         after approval.
2631. – 2699. Reserved.




Series 2000 | Dealer Member Organization and Individual Approval Rules                                               Rule 2600
                                                                         Investment Dealer and Partially Consolidated Rules

RULE 2700 | CONTINUING EDUCATION REQUIREMENTS FOR APPROVED PERSONS

2701. Introduction
         (1)     The Corporation requires Approved Persons to meet continuing education requirements to
                 enhance and further develop their baseline licensing proficiencies.
         (2)     Rule 2700 is divided into the following parts:
                 Part A – The continuing education program and continuing education requirements
                              [sections 2703 and 2704]
                 Part B – Continuing education program courses and administration
                              [sections 2715 through 2717]
                 Part C – Participation in the continuing education program
                              [sections 2725 and 2726]
                 Part D – Changes during a continuing education program cycle
                              [section 2735]
                 Part E – Discretionary relief
                              [section 2745]
                 Part F – Penalties applicable to the continuing education requirements for Approved Persons
                              [section 2755]
2702. Definitions
         (1)     The following terms have the meaning set out below when used in sections 2703 through 2799:
                  “continuing                A single, integrated course or series of relevant courses, seminars, programs or
                  education course”          presentations that together meet the time and content requirements for continuing
                                             education set out in Rule 2700.
                  “continuing                An Approved Person approved in one or more of the categories set out in
                  education                  subsection 2704(1).
                  participant”
                  “continuing                The Corporation’s continuing education program, consisting of compliance and
                  education                  professional development requirements.
                  program”


PART A - THE CONTINUING EDUCATION PROGRAM AND CONTINUING EDUCATION REQUIREMENTS
2703. The continuing education program
         (1)     The continuing education program consists of three parts:
                 (i)     a compliance course requirement, which is training covering ethical issues, regulatory
                         developments and rules governing investment dealer conduct,
                 (ii)    a professional development course requirement, which is training that fosters learning and
                         development in areas relevant to investment dealer business, and
                 (iii)   mandated annual continuing education training speciﬁcally prescribed by the Corporation
                         which may satisfy clauses (i) or (ii) above as prescribed by the Corporation.

Series 2000 | Dealer Member Organization and Individual Approval Rules                                                 Rule 2700
                                                                         Investment Dealer and Partially Consolidated Rules

         (2)     The continuing education program operates in two year cycles. The first two year cycle
                 commenced on January 1, 2018. The beginning and end of each continuing education program
                 cycle is the same for all continuing education participants.
         (3)     A Dealer Member or external course provider may provide a continuing education course.
         (4)     A Dealer Member or external course provider may submit continuing education courses for
                 accreditation through the Corporation’s accreditation process.
         (5)     A continuing education participant is exempt from the professional development course
                 requirement if he or she:
                 (i)      is approved in the category of Registered Representative, Associate Portfolio Manager,
                          Portfolio Manager or Supervisor, and
                 (ii)     has been continuously approved in a retail trading capacity since January 1, 1990 or earlier
                          by either the Corporation, the Toronto Stock Exchange, the Montreal Exchange, or the TSX
                          Venture Exchange including any of their predecessors.
         (6)     A continuing education participant cannot receive continuing education credits for the same
                 continuing education course unless the course has been updated to contain new course content,
                 with the exception of Corporation accredited ethics courses referred to in subsection 2715(3).
2704. Continuing education requirements
         (1)     In each continuing education program cycle, a continuing education participant must meet the
                 continuing education requirements for the applicable Approved Person category, regardless of
                 product type, as set out in the following table.


                                                                                                            Professional
                                                                                     Compliance course   development course
                        Approved Person Category                  Client Type          requirement          requirement

                   Registered Representative                 retail client                  Yes                 Yes

                   Registered Representative                 institutional client           Yes                 No

                   Investment Representative                 retail client or               Yes                 No
                                                             institutional client

                   Portfolio Manager                         retail client or               Yes                 Yes
                                                             institutional client

                   Associate Portfolio Manager               retail client or               Yes                 Yes
                                                             institutional client

                   Trader                                                N/A                Yes                 No

                   Supervisor                                retail client or               Yes                 No
                                                             institutional client



Series 2000 | Dealer Member Organization and Individual Approval Rules                                                Rule 2700
                                                                         Investment Dealer and Partially Consolidated Rules


                                                                                                            Professional
                                                                                     Compliance course   development course
                         Approved Person Category                 Client Type          requirement          requirement

                   Ultimate Designated Person                            N/A                Yes                 No

                   Chief Compliance Officer                              N/A                Yes                 No

         (2)     Registered Representatives dealing in mutual funds only who are an employee of a firm
                 registered as both an investment dealer and a mutual fund dealer:
                 (i)       are not subject to and do not need to comply with the Registered Representative
                           continuing education requirements set out in subsection 2704(1), and
                 (ii)      are subject to and must comply with the continuing education requirements for individuals
                           registered as a dealing representative set out in Mutual Fund Dealer Rule 900.
         (3)     A continuing education participant registered in more than one Approved Person category must
                 meet the continuing education requirements of the category with the most onerous continuing
                 education requirements.
         (4)     All continuing education participants must complete at least 10 hours of compliance courses in
                 each continuing education program cycle in accordance with requirements in section 2715.
         (5)     A continuing education participant that is subject to professional development requirements
                 must complete at least 20 hours of professional development courses in each continuing
                 education program cycle in accordance with requirements in section 2716.
2705. – 2714. Reserved.

PART B – CONTINUING EDUCATION PROGRAM COURSES AND ADMINISTRATION
2715. The compliance course
         (1)     A continuing education participant:
                 (i)       cannot carry forward compliance course credits to satisfy continuing education
                           requirements of a subsequent continuing education program cycle,
                 (ii)      may receive continuing education credit for a compliance course with an examination, only
                           if the continuing education participant successfully passes the examination, and
                 (iii)     may receive continuing education credit of a maximum of five hours for compliance
                           continuing education courses offered by a foreign securities dealer or foreign external
                           course provider.
         (2)     A Dealer Member may give continuing education credit for Dealer Member compliance manual
                 training where:
                 (i)       the content of the compliance manual training satisfies clause 2703(1)(i), and
                 (ii)      the compliance manual training is delivered by the Dealer Member through in-person
                           seminars, or webinars that are accompanied by a method of evaluation.




Series 2000 | Dealer Member Organization and Individual Approval Rules                                               Rule 2700
                                                                         Investment Dealer and Partially Consolidated Rules

         (3)     The Corporation will accredit ethics courses that a continuing education participant can repeat
                 and count towards fulfillment of the compliance course requirement in two continuing education
                 program cycles.
2716. The professional development course
         (1)     A continuing education participant subject to the professional development course requirement:
                 (i)     may receive continuing education credit for a professional development course with an
                         examination, only if the continuing education participant successfully passes the
                         examination.
2717. Dealer Member’s administration of the continuing education program
         (1)     A Dealer Member must:
                 (i)     verify the continuing education participant’s compliance with the requirements at the end
                         of the continuing education program cycle,
                 (ii)    keep evidence of a continuing education participant’s completion of the continuing
                         education course, which may be a certificate issued by the course provider, an attendance
                         sheet, or bulk notice of completion,
                 (iii)   keep continuing education program records, including course related materials, for each
                         continuing education program cycle for a minimum of seven years following the end of the
                         continuing education program cycle,
                 (iv)    designate an individual responsible for supervising training and approving a continuing
                         education participant’s chosen continuing education course,
                 (v)     ensure that a continuing education participant’s chosen continuing education course
                         satisfies the content criteria described in subsection 2703(1),
                 (vi)    where the continuing education course is delivered by the Dealer Member, evaluate a
                         continuing education participant’s knowledge and understanding of the course,
                 (vii) ensure that each continuing education participant meets the continuing education
                       requirements during each continuing education program cycle, and
                 (viii) update the continuing education reporting system and notify the Corporation within 10
                        business days after the end of the continuing education program cycle of all continuing
                        education participants that have met their continuing education requirements within the
                        prescribed cycle.
         (2)     A Dealer Member may allow a continuing education participant to use the continuing education
                 credits earned through courses or seminars completed at the continuing education participant’s
                 former sponsoring Dealer Member. A Dealer Member may accept a statement of completion
                 issued by the continuing education participant’s former sponsoring Dealer Member.
         (3)     A Dealer Member may allow a continuing education participant to use mandatory conduct
                 training prescribed in subsection 2604(2) towards compliance course requirement in clause
                 2703(1)(i).
2718. – 2724. Reserved.




Series 2000 | Dealer Member Organization and Individual Approval Rules                                              Rule 2700
                                                                         Investment Dealer and Partially Consolidated Rules

PART C – PARTICIPATION IN THE CONTINUING EDUCATION PROGRAM
2725. Participation of recently Approved Persons
         (1)     An individual enters the continuing education program cycle upon initial approval in an Approved
                 Person category listed in subsection 2704(1).
         (2)     Notwithstanding subsection 2725(1), an individual that receives approval in an Approved Person
                 category listed in subsection 2704(1) during the last six months of the current continuing
                 education program cycle will become subject to the applicable continuing education
                 requirements starting at the beginning of the next continuing education program cycle.
2726. – 2734. Reserved.

PART D - CHANGES DURING A CONTINUING EDUCATION PROGRAM CYCLE
2735. Changes to Approved Persons category during a continuing education program cycle
         (1)     A continuing education participant who changes his or her Approved Person category during a
                 continuing education program cycle must complete the continuing education requirements
                 applicable to the new Approved Person category in the same continuing education program cycle.
         (2)     Notwithstanding subsection 2735(1), a continuing education participant who changes his or her
                 Approved Person category during the last six months of the current continuing education program
                 cycle, becomes subject to the applicable continuing education requirements of the new Approved
                 Person category at the beginning of the next continuing education program cycle.
         (3)     A continuing education participant may not change to an Approved Person category with less
                 onerous continuing education requirements to avoid completing the more onerous continuing
                 education requirements of a former Approved Person category, or penalties for non-completion
                 of continuing education requirements. Any change to the Approved Person category during the
                 last six months of the continuing education program cycle which results in less onerous
                 continuing education requirements must be accompanied by an explanation from the sponsoring
                 Dealer Member to satisfy the Corporation that the category change is not an avoidance measure.
2736. – 2744. Reserved.

PART E – DISCRETIONARY RELIEF
2745. Discretionary Relief
         (1)     The Corporation may extend the time a continuing education participant has to complete any
                 continuing education course beyond the two year continuing education program cycle due to, but
                 not limited to, an illness if:
                 (i)     an Executive at the continuing education participant’s sponsoring Dealer Member:
                         (a)     approves the extension,
                         (b)     notifies the Corporation of the reason for the extension, and
                         (c)     proposes the new date of completion of the required course,
                 and
                 (ii)    the Corporation approves the request for an extension.

Series 2000 | Dealer Member Organization and Individual Approval Rules                                              Rule 2700
                                                                         Investment Dealer and Partially Consolidated Rules

         (2)     In the case of an indefinite leave of absence, the Corporation may exempt from the continuing
                 education program a continuing education participant who is unable to complete his or her
                 continuing education requirements due to, but not limited to an illness, for more than one
                 continuing education program cycle if:
                 (i)     an Executive at the continuing education participant’s sponsoring Dealer Member:
                         (a)     approves the exemption,
                         (b)     notifies the Corporation of the reason for the exemption, and
                         (c)     states that the leave is for an indefinite period,
                 and
                 (ii)    the Corporation approves the request for an exemption.
         (3)     A continuing education participant who is granted an exemption under subsection 2745(2) and
                 returns to the industry after an absence of:
                 (i)     three years or less must have the Corporation determine the continuing education
                         requirements before he or she resumes any activity that needs approval, or
                 (ii)    more than three years must meet the applicable proficiency and registration requirements
                         for his or her Approved Person category.
2746. – 2754. Reserved.

PART F - PENALTIES APPLICABLE TO THE CONTINUING EDUCATION REQUIREMENTS FOR APPROVED PERSONS
2755. Penalties for late filing or not completing continuing education requirements in a continuing
      education program cycle
         (1)     On the last business day of the first month of a continuing education program cycle, the
                 Corporation will automatically suspend the approval of the continuing education participant if:
                 (i)     a continuing education participant fails to complete the continuing education
                         requirements for the previous continuing education program cycle within the prescribed
                         cycle, or
                 (ii)    the sponsoring Dealer Member fails to update the continuing education reporting system
                         and notify the Corporation as required by clause 2717(1)(vii).
         (2)     A sponsoring Dealer Member that fails to comply with the requirements of clause 2717(1)(vii)
                 will be liable for and pay the Corporation such fees as the Board may prescribe from time to time.
         (3)     The Corporation may reinstate the continuing education participant’s approval after the
                 sponsoring Dealer Member has notified the Corporation in writing that the continuing education
                 participant has completed the continuing education requirements.
         (4)     If a sponsoring Dealer Member pays a fine in error, the Corporation will issue a refund provided
                 the Dealer Member requests a refund within 120 days of the date the invoice is issued by the
                 Corporation.
2756. – 2799. Reserved.




Series 2000 | Dealer Member Organization and Individual Approval Rules                                              Rule 2700
                                                                         Investment Dealer and Partially Consolidated Rules

RULE 2800 | THE NATIONAL REGISTRATION DATABASE

2801. Introduction
         (1)     A Dealer Member must participate in the National Registration Database (defined in subsection
                 2802(1).
         (2)     A Dealer Member must ensure timely and accurate filings on the National Registration Database.
2802. Definitions
         (1)     The following terms have the meaning set out below when used in sections 2803 through 2808:
                  “authorized firm              For a Dealer Member, an individual with his or her own National Registration
                  representative"               Database user identification and who is authorized by the Dealer Member to
                                                submit information in National Registration Database format for that Dealer
                                                Member and individual applicants with respect to whom the Dealer Member is
                                                the sponsoring Dealer Member.
                  “chief authorized firm        For a Dealer Member filer, an individual who is an authorized firm representative
                  representative"               and has accepted an appointment as a chief authorized firm representative by the
                                                Dealer Member.
                  “National Registration        The online electronic database of registration and approval information regarding
                  Database”                     Dealer Members, their registered or Approved Persons and other firms and
                                                individuals registered under securities laws, and includes the computer system
                                                providing for the transmission, receipt, review and dissemination of that
                                                registration information by electronic means including, any successor database.
                  “National Registration        An account with a member of the Canadian Payments Association from which
                  Database account”             fees may be paid with respect to National Registration Database by electronic
                                                pre-authorized debit.
                  “National Registration        The Alberta Securities Commission or a successor appointed by the securities
                  Database                      regulatory authorities to operate the National Registration Database.
                  Administrator”
                  “National Registration        The electronic format for submitting information through the National
                  Database format”              Registration Database website.
                  “National Registration        The information that is submitted under securities laws, securities directions or
                  Database submission”          under Rule 2800, in the National Registration Database format, or the act of
                                                submitting information under securities laws, securities directions or under Rule
                                                2800, in the National Registration Database format, as the context requires.
                  “National Registration        The website operated by the National Registration Database Administrator for
                  Database website”             the National Registration Database submissions.


2803. Dealer Member obligations for the National Registration Database
         (1)     A Dealer Member must, as prescribed by the applicable securities laws:
                 (i)     enroll in the National Registration Database and pay the enrollment fee to the securities
                         regulatory authority in the Dealer Member’s principal jurisdiction,
Series 2000 | Dealer Member Organization and Individual Approval Rules                                                    Rule 2800
                                                                         Investment Dealer and Partially Consolidated Rules

                 (ii)    enroll, with the National Registration Database Administrator, only one chief authorized
                         firm representative responsible for the Dealer Member’s National Registration Database
                         filings,
                 (iii)   notify the National Registration Database Administrator, of the appointment of a new chief
                         authorized firm representative within seven days of the appointment,
                 (iv)    notify the National Registration Database Administrator, of any change in name, phone
                         number, fax number or email address of the chief authorized firm representative within
                         seven days of the change,
                 (v)     maintain only one National Registration Database account, and
                 (vi)    submit through the National Registration Database any change of an authorized firm
                         representative who is not the chief authorized firm representative, within seven days.
         (2)     The following list describes the submission requirements as prescribed by securities laws.
                 (i)     A Dealer Member must make the following submissions using the National Registration
                         Database on the National Registration Database form specified, within the time period
                         prescribed by National Instrument 33-109.
                          Type of submission                                       Form

                          (a) an application for approval of an individual         Form 33-109F4 - Registration of Individuals and
                              under any Corporation requirement                    Review of Permitted Individuals
                          (b) a notification of any change in the type of          Form 33-109F2 - Change or Surrender of
                              business which an Approved Person will               Individual Categories
                              conduct
                          (c) (I) an application for different or                  Form 33-109F2 - Change or Surrender of
                                  additional approval under Corporation            Individual Categories
                                  requirements for any Approved Person,
                               (II) a surrender of existing approval
                          (d) a report of a change of information                  Form 33-109F5 - Change of Registration
                              regarding an Approved Person previously              Information
                              submitted in Form 33-109F4
                          (e) an application for an exemption from a       “Apply for an Exemption” submission on the
                              proficiency requirement in sections 2603,    National Registration Database
                              2604 or 2605, as applicable, for an Approved
                              Person or applicant for approval
                          (f) a notification by a Dealer Member of the             Form 33-109F1 - Notice of End of Individual
                              end of an employee’s Approved Person                 Registration or Permitted Individual Status
                              status
                          (g) a notification of a business location opening        Form 33- 109F3 - Business locations other than
                              or closing under section 2202                        head office




Series 2000 | Dealer Member Organization and Individual Approval Rules                                                      Rule 2800
                                                                         Investment Dealer and Partially Consolidated Rules


                          Type of submission                                       Form

                          (h) a notification of change of address, type of         Form 33-109F3 - Business locations other than
                              location or supervision of any business              head office
                              location
                          (i) notification of reinstatement of individual          Form 33-109F7 - Reinstatement of Registered
                              approval.                                            Individuals and Permitted Individuals (see
                                                                                   section 2808 for eligible criteria before making
                                                                                   this filing).

                 (ii)    Before filing a notice of change of business type under sub-clause 2803(2)(i)(b) above, a
                         Dealer Member must notify the Corporation through the National Registration Database
                         that either:
                         (a)     the Approved Person has completed the necessary proficiency requirements under
                                 sections 2603, 2604 or 2605, as applicable, to undertake the type of business, or
                         (b)     the Approved Person has been granted an exemption from the proficiency
                                 requirements under sections 2625 through 2628.
2804. Temporary hardship exemption
         (1)     A Dealer Member that cannot file a document in the National Registration Database format
                 within the time required under subsection 2803(2) because of unexpected technical problems
                 must submit the document outside of the National Registration Database within seven days of
                 the required filing date.
         (2)     When submitting outside of the National Registration Database under subsection 2804(1), the
                 Dealer Member must include the following text at the top of the first page of the submission in
                 capital letters:
                         “IN ACCORDANCE WITH SECTION 2804 OF THE CORPORATION INVESTMENT DEALER
                         AND PARTIALLY CONSOLIDATED RULES AND PART 5 OF NATIONAL INSTRUMENT 31-
                         102 NATIONAL REGISTRATION DATABASE, WE ARE SUBMITTING THIS [SPECIFY
                         DOCUMENT] OUTSIDE OF NATIONAL REGISTRATION DATABASE UNDER A TEMPORARY
                         HARDSHIP EXEMPTION.”
         (3)     As soon as practicable, but within fourteen days after the unexpected technical problems have
                 been fixed, a Dealer Member must resubmit using the National Registration Database format the
                 information filed outside of the National Registration Database under subsection 2804(1).
2805. Due diligence and record keeping
         (1)     A Dealer Member must make reasonable efforts to ensure that the information submitted
                 through the National Registration Database is true and complete.
         (2)     A Dealer Member must keep all documents used to meet its obligation under subsection 2805(1)
                 for seven years after the individual ceases to be an Approved Person of the Dealer Member, or in
                 any case when an individual who applied for approval was refused or withdrawn.
         (3)     A Dealer Member must record the National Registration Database submission number on any
                 document kept under subsection 2805(2).


Series 2000 | Dealer Member Organization and Individual Approval Rules                                                       Rule 2800
                                                                         Investment Dealer and Partially Consolidated Rules

         (4)     For recently approved individuals, a Dealer Member must obtain, within 60 days of approval, a
                 copy of the most recent Form 33-109F1 issued in respect of the individual by the former
                 sponsoring Dealer Member.
2806. Fees
         (1)     A Dealer Member must pay, the annual National Registration Database system fee set by the
                 Corporation, to the securities regulatory authority in the local jurisdiction by electronic pre-
                 authorized debit through the National Registration Database.
         (2)     The following fees must be submitted as prescribed by securities laws and Corporation
                 requirements:
                 (i)     a Dealer Member making any National Registration Database submission under section
                         2803 must pay the prescribed fees for the submission, together with the National
                         Registration Database system fee, to the securities regulatory authority in the Dealer
                         Member’s local jurisdiction for the use of the National Registration Database,
                 (ii)    a Dealer Member must pay any prescribed fees for failure to file any notification within the
                         time specified, and
                 (iii)   a Dealer Member is required to pay all fees payable under section 2806 through its
                         National Registration Database account by pre-authorized electronic debit.
         (3)     A Dealer Member making an application for a proficiency exemption, for an Approved Person or
                 applicant for approval, will be liable for and pay the Corporation an exemption request fee as
                 prescribed from time to time by the Board.
2807. Cessation of Approved Person status
         (1)     A Dealer Member must notify the Corporation of the cessation of an individual’s status as an
                 Approved Person, within the time period and the manner prescribed in National Instrument 33-
                 109.
         (2)     Approval of an individual will end if:
                 (i)     the individual ceases to be an Approved Person with a Dealer Member, or
                 (ii)    the approved agency relationship with a Dealer Member is terminated.
         (3)     A Dealer Member must upon receiving a request from an individual that was its former Approved
                 Person, provide to the individual a copy of the Form 33-109F1 that the Dealer Member submitted
                 under subsection 2807(1) in respect of that individual, within the time period prescribed by
                 National Instrument 33-109.
         (4)     If a Dealer Member completed and submitted the information in item five of Form 33-109F1 in
                 respect of an individual who made a request under subsection 2807(3) and that information was
                 not included in the initial copy provided to the individual, the Dealer Member must provide to
                 that individual a further copy of the completed Form 33-109F1, including the information in item
                 five, , within the time period prescribed by National Instrument 33-109.




Series 2000 | Dealer Member Organization and Individual Approval Rules                                              Rule 2800
                                                                         Investment Dealer and Partially Consolidated Rules

2808. Reinstatement of Approved Persons
         (1)     An individual may be reinstated in the same Approved Person category or categories by
                 submitting a completed Form 33-109F7, provided the conditions in Form 33-109F7 and National
                 Instrument 33-109 are satisfied.

2809. – 2999. Reserved.




Series 2000 | Dealer Member Organization and Individual Approval Rules                                              Rule 2800
                                                            Investment Dealer and Partially Consolidated Rules


SERIES 3000 | BUSINESS CONDUCT AND CLIENT ACCOUNTS RULES

RULE 3100 | DEALING WITH CLIENTS

3101. Introduction
         (1)     Rule 3100 sets out a Dealer Member’s obligations with respect to their dealings with their clients.
                 The requirements are intended to underpin the Corporation’s objectives of maintaining investor
                 confidence in securities markets and reinforcing a Dealer Member’s responsibility to observe high
                 standards of ethics and conduct in their dealings with clients.
         (2)     Rule 3100 is divided into the following parts:
                 Part A – Business Conduct
                             [section 3102]
                 Part B – Conflicts of interest
                            [sections 3110 through 3118]
                 Part C – Best execution of client orders
                            [sections 3119 through 3129]
                 Part D – Client identifiers
                            [section 3140]

PART A – BUSINESS CONDUCT
3102. Business conduct
         (1)     A Dealer Member must ensure that it handles its clients’ business within the bounds of ethical
                 conduct, consistent with just and equitable principles of trade, and in a manner that is not
                 detrimental to the interests of the investing public and the securities industry.
         (2)     A Dealer Member must take reasonable steps to ensure that all orders or recommendations for
                 any account are within the bounds of good business practice.
3103. – 3109. Reserved.

PART B – CONFLICTS OF INTEREST
3110. Responsibility to identify conflicts of interest
         (1)     A Dealer Member must take reasonable steps to identify existing material conflicts of interest,
                 and material conflicts of interest that are reasonably foreseeable:
                 (i)     between the Dealer Member and the client, and
                 (ii)    between each Approved Person acting on the Dealer Member’s behalf and the client.
         (2)     An Approved Person must take reasonable steps to identify existing material conflicts of interest,
                 and material conflicts of interest that are reasonably foreseeable, between the Approved Person
                 and the client.
         (3)     If an Approved Person identifies a material conflict of interest under subsection 3110(2), the
                 Approved Person must promptly report that conflict of interest to the Dealer Member.

Series 3000 | Business Conduct and Client Accounts Rules                                                     Rule 3100
                                                              Investment Dealer and Partially Consolidated Rules

3111. Approved Person responsibility to address conflicts of interest
         (1)     An Approved Person must address all material conflicts of interest between the client and the
                 Approved Person in the best interest of the client.
         (2)     An Approved Person must avoid any material conflict of interest between the client and the
                 Approved Person if the conflict is not, or cannot be, otherwise addressed in the best interest of
                 the client.
         (3)     An Approved Person must not engage in any trading or advising activity in connection with a
                 material conflict of interest identified by the Approved Person under subsection 3110(2) unless,
                 (i)      the conflict has been addressed in the best interest of the client, and
                 (ii)     the Dealer Member has given the Approved Person its consent to proceed with the activity.
3112. Dealer Member responsibility to address conflicts of interest
         (1)     A Dealer Member must address all material conflicts of interest between the Dealer Member and
                 the client, including each Approved Person acting on its behalf, in the best interest of the client.
         (2)     A Dealer Member must avoid any material conflict of interest between the client and the Dealer
                 Member, including each Approved Person acting on its behalf, if the conflict is not, or cannot be,
                 otherwise addressed in the best interest of the client.
         (3)     A Dealer Member must adequately supervise how all material conflicts of interest between the
                 client and the Approved Person are addressed by its Approved Persons pursuant to section 3111.
3113. Responsibility to disclose conflicts of interest
         (1)     A Dealer Member must disclose in writing all material conflicts of interest identified under
                 subsections 3110(1) and 3110(2) to the client whose interests are affected by the conflicts of
                 interest if a reasonable client would expect to be informed of those conflicts of interest.
         (2)     The information required to be disclosed to the client under subsection 3113(1) must:
                 (i)     include a description of:
                         (a)     the nature and extent of the conflict of interest,
                         (b)     the potential impact on and risk that the conflict of interest could pose to the client,
                                 and
                         (c)     how the conflict of interest has been, or will be, addressed,
                 (ii)    be presented in a manner that, to a reasonable person, is prominent, specific and written in
                         plain language,
                 (iii)    be disclosed:
                         (a)     before opening an account for the client if the conflict has been identified at that
                                 time, or
                         (b)     in a timely manner, upon identification of a conflict that must be disclosed under
                                 subsection 3113(1) that has not previously been disclosed to the client.
         (3)     For greater certainty, a Dealer Member and an Approved Person do not satisfy subsections 3111(1)
                 or 3112(1) solely by providing disclosure to the client.




Series 3000 | Business Conduct and Client Accounts Rules                                                          Rule 3100
                                                                 Investment Dealer and Partially Consolidated Rules

3114. Conflicts of interest policies and procedures
         (1)     A Dealer Member’s policies and procedures must specifically address identifying, disclosing and
                 avoiding or otherwise addressing material conflict of interest situations.
3115. Personal financial dealings
         (1)     An employee or Approved Person of a Dealer Member must not, directly or indirectly, engage in
                 any personal financial dealings with clients.
         (2)     Personal financial dealings include, but are not limited to, the following types of dealings:
                 (i)     Accepting any consideration
                         (a)     Except as described in paragraphs 3115(2)(i)(a)(I) and 3115(2)(i)(a)(II) accepting any
                                 consideration, including remuneration, gratuity or benefit, from any person other
                                 than the Dealer Member for any activities conducted on behalf of a client.
                                 (I)     Consideration that is non-monetary, of minimal value, and infrequent such that
                                         it will not cause a reasonable person to question whether it created a conflict
                                         of interest or otherwise improperly influenced the Dealer Member or its
                                         employees would not be considered to be consideration for the purposes of
                                         sub-clause 3115(2)(i)(a).
                                 (II)    Compensation received from a client in exchange for services provided through
                                         an approved outside activity would not be considered to be consideration for
                                         the purpose of sub-clause 3115(2)(i)(a).
                 (ii)    Settlement agreements without the Dealer Member’s approval
                         (a)     Entering into a settlement agreement without the Dealer Member’s prior written
                                 consent, or
                         (b)     Paying for client account losses out of personal funds without the Dealer Member’s
                                 prior written consent.
                 (iii)   Borrowing from clients
                         (a)     Borrowing money or receiving a guarantee in relation to borrowing money, securities
                                 or any other assets from a client, unless:
                                 (I)      the client is a financial institution whose business includes lending money to
                                          the public and the borrowing is in the normal course of the institution’s
                                          business, or
                                 (II)     the client is a Related Person as defined by the Income Tax Act (Canada) and
                                          the transaction is addressed in accordance with the Dealer Member’s policies
                                          and procedures,
                                 and
                                 (III)    in the case of Associate Portfolio Managers, Portfolio Managers, Investment
                                          Representatives and Registered Representatives, the arrangement set out in
                                          paragraph 3115(2)(iii)(a)(II) is disclosed to and approved in writing by the
                                          Dealer Member, prior to the transaction.
                 (iv)    Lending to clients



Series 3000 | Business Conduct and Client Accounts Rules                                                            Rule 3100
                                                                Investment Dealer and Partially Consolidated Rules

                         (a)     Lending money, or providing a guarantee in relation to a loan of money, securities or
                                 any other assets to a client, unless:
                                 (I)      the client is a Related Person as defined by the Income Tax Act (Canada) and
                                          the transaction complies with the Dealer Member’s policies and procedures,
                                          and
                                 (II)     in the case of Associate Portfolio Managers, Portfolio Managers, Investment
                                          Representatives and Registered Representatives, the arrangement set out in
                                          paragraph 3115(2)(iv)(a)(I) is disclosed to and approved in writing by the Dealer
                                          Member, prior to the transaction.
                 (v)     Control or authority
                         (a)     Acting as a Power of Attorney, trustee, executor, or otherwise having full or partial
                                 control or authority over the financial affairs of a client, unless:
                                 (I)      the client is a Related Person as defined by the Income Tax Act (Canada) and
                                          the existence of such control is addressed in accordance with the Dealer
                                          Member’s policies and procedures, and
                                 (II)     in the case of Associate Portfolio Managers, Portfolio Managers, Investment
                                          Representatives and Registered Representatives, the arrangement in paragraph
                                          3115(2)(v)(a)(I) is disclosed to and approved in writing by the Dealer Member,
                                          prior to entering into the arrangement.
                         (b)     In the case of discretionary accounts and managed accounts, paragraph
                                 3115(2)(v)(a)(I) does not apply to the extent that the control or authority is solely
                                 exercised consistent with the terms of the discretionary account agreement or the
                                 managed account agreement, and with Corporation requirements for such accounts.
3116. Offering gratuity
         (1)     A Dealer Member or any Approved Person, employee or shareholder of a Dealer Member must
                 not give, offer, or agree to give or offer, directly or indirectly, a gratuity, advantage, benefit or
                 any other consideration, in relation to any business of the client with the Dealer Member, to any
                 partner, director, officer, employee, agent or shareholder of a client or any associate of such
                 persons.
         (2)     Subsection 3116(1) does not apply if the prior written consent of the client has been obtained.
3117. Mutual fund sales incentives
         (1)     For purposes of section 3117, the term "non-cash sales incentive" includes, without limitation,
                 domestic or foreign trips, goods, services, gratuities, advantages, benefits or any other non-cash
                 compensation.
         (2)     A Dealer Member, related company, partner, employee or Approved Person of the Dealer
                 Member or related company, must not, directly or indirectly, accept or pay any non-cash sales
                 incentive in connection with the sale or distribution of mutual fund products.
         (3)     The prohibition against non-cash mutual fund sales incentives in section 3117 does not apply to:




Series 3000 | Business Conduct and Client Accounts Rules                                                           Rule 3100
                                                                     Investment Dealer and Partially Consolidated Rules

                 (i)     non-cash sales incentives earned or awarded through a Dealer Member’s internal incentive
                         program for which eligibility is determined with respect to all services and products offered
                         by the Dealer Member,
                 (ii)    commissions or fees payable in cash and calculated with reference only to particular sales
                         or volumes of sales of mutual fund,
                 (iii)   service fees or trailing commissions,
                 (iv)    cost of marketing materials, or
                 (v)     normal and reasonable business promotion activities taking place where the recipient is
                         employed or resides.
3118. Tied selling
         (1)     A Dealer Member must not require a client to purchase, use or invest in any product, service,
                 security or derivative as a condition, or on terms that would appear to a reasonable person to be
                 a condition, of supplying, continuing to supply or selling a product, service, security or derivative.
         (2)     Subsection 3118(1) does not prohibit a Dealer Member from providing financial incentives or
                 advantages such as relationship pricing or other beneficial selling arrangements, to clients.

PART C – BEST EXECUTION OF CLIENT ORDERS AND TRANSACTIONS
3119. Definitions
         (1)     The following terms have the meaning set out below when used in sections 3119 through 3129:
                  “best execution”                     Obtaining the most advantageous execution terms reasonably available
                                                       under the circumstances.
                  “foreign exchange-traded             A security, other than a listed security, that is listed on a foreign organized
                  security”                            regulated market.
                  “foreign organized                   The same meaning as set out in the Universal Market Integrity Rules,
                  regulated market”                    section 1.1.
                  “last sale price”                    The same meaning as set out in the Universal Market Integrity Rules,
                                                       section 1.1.
                  “Opening Order”                      The same meaning as set out in the Universal Market Integrity Rules,
                                                       section 1.1.
                  “over-the-counter security”          A security, other than:
                                                       (i) a listed security,
                                                       (ii) a foreign exchange-traded security,
                                                       (iii) a security that is undergoing a primary market transaction, and
                                                        (iv) a derivative.
                  “Trading Rules”                      The same meaning as set out in the Universal Market Integrity Rules,
                                                       section 1.1.




Series 3000 | Business Conduct and Client Accounts Rules                                                                       Rule 3100
                                                               Investment Dealer and Partially Consolidated Rules

3120. Best execution obligation
         (1)     A Dealer Member’s policies and procedures must specifically address achieving best execution for
                 client orders and transactions.
3121. Best execution factors for listed security and listed derivative orders
         (1)     The policies and procedures for achieving best execution of client orders in listed securities,
                 foreign-exchange traded securities and listed derivatives must address the following broad
                 factors:
                 (i)      the price of the security or derivative,
                 (ii)     the speed of execution of the client order,
                 (iii)    the certainty of execution of the client order, and
                 (iv)     the overall cost of the transaction, when costs are passed on to clients.
         (2)     In addition to the broad factors listed in subsection 3121(1), the policies and procedures for best
                 execution of client orders for listed securities and foreign-exchange traded securities must
                 address the following specific factors:
                 (i)      the considerations taken into account when determining appropriate routing strategies for
                          client orders,
                 (ii)     the considerations for fair pricing of Opening Orders when determining where to enter an
                          Opening Order,
                 (iii)    the considerations when not all marketplaces are open and available for trading,
                 (iv)     how order and trade information from all appropriate marketplaces, including unprotected
                          marketplaces and foreign organized regulated markets, is taken into account,
                 (v)      the factors related to executing client orders on unprotected marketplaces, and
                 (vi)     the factors related to sending client orders to a foreign intermediary for execution.
         (3)     The policies and procedures for best execution must address the factors used to achieve best
                 execution when manually handling a client order for trades on a marketplace, including the
                 following “prevailing market conditions”:
                 (i)      the direction of the market for the security or derivative,
                 (ii)     the depth of the posted market,
                 (iii)    the last sale price and the prices and volumes of previous trades,
                 (iv)     the size of the spread, and
                 (v)      the liquidity of the security or derivative.
         (4)     In addition to the broad factors listed in subsection 3121(1), the policies and procedures for best
                 execution of client orders for listed derivatives must consider whether the individual order is part
                 of a multiple orders trading strategy and, if so, the broad factors in subsection 3121(1) must be
                 addressed as they relate to execution of the overall strategy.
3122. Best execution factors for over-the-counter security and over-the-counter derivative transactions
         (1)     The policies and procedures for achieving best execution of client transactions in over-the-
                 counter securities and over-the-counter derivatives must be designed to ensure fair pricing.


Series 3000 | Business Conduct and Client Accounts Rules                                                          Rule 3100
                                                              Investment Dealer and Partially Consolidated Rules

         (2)     Subject to subsection 3122(3), to ensure fair pricing when acting as principal, a Dealer Member
                 must not:
                 (i)      purchase over-the-counter securities for its own account from a client, or
                 (ii)     sell over-the-counter securities from its own account to a client, or
                 (iii)    transact in over-the-counter derivatives with a client.
         (3)     Subsection 3122(2) does not apply when a transaction is executed at an aggregate price
                 (including any mark-up or mark-down) that is fair and reasonable, taking into consideration all
                 relevant factors, including the following:
                 (i)      in the case of a transaction in over-the-counter securities, the fair market value of the
                          securities and of any securities exchanged or traded in connection with the transaction at
                          the time of the transaction,
                 (ii)     in the case of transactions in over-the-counter derivatives:
                         (a)     the fair market value or settlement price of the equivalent listed derivative, and
                         (b)     the fair market value of the derivatives underlying interest and of any related
                                 derivatives involved in the same trading strategy, at the time of the transaction,
                 (iii)    the expense involved in effecting the transaction or transactions,
                 (iv)     the fact that the Dealer Member is entitled to a profit, and
                 (v)      the total dollar amount or dollar amount at risk of the transaction or transactions.
         (4)     To ensure fair pricing when acting as agent, a Dealer Member must not purchase over-the-
                 counter securities, sell over-the-counter securities, or transact in over-the-counter derivatives on
                 behalf of a client for a commission or service charge in excess of a fair and reasonable amount,
                 taking into consideration all relevant factors, including the following:
                 (i)      the availability of the securities or derivatives involved in the transaction,
                 (ii)     the expense involved in effecting the transaction or transactions,
                 (iii)    the value of the services rendered by the Dealer Member, and
                 (iv)     the amount of any other compensation received or to be received by the Dealer Member
                          in connection with the transaction.
3123. Best execution process
         (1)     The policies and procedures for best execution must specifically address the process for achieving
                 best execution that includes the following:
                 (i)      for the execution of all client orders and transactions:
                         (a)     requiring the Dealer Member to consider the instructions of the client, subject to its
                                 obligations under Corporation requirements and securities laws, and
                         (b)     describing any material conflicts of interest that may arise when sending client orders
                                 for handling or execution or when arranging for a client transaction and how these
                                 conflicts are to be managed,
                  and,
                 (ii)     for the execution of client orders for listed securities and foreign exchange-traded
                          securities that trade on a marketplace:


Series 3000 | Business Conduct and Client Accounts Rules                                                         Rule 3100
                                                             Investment Dealer and Partially Consolidated Rules

                         (a)     describing the Dealer Member’s order handling and routing practices for achieving
                                 best execution,
                         (b)     taking into account order and trade information from all appropriate marketplaces,
                         (c)     the rationale for accessing or not accessing particular marketplaces, and
                         (d)     the circumstances under which a Dealer Member will move an order entered on one
                                 marketplace to another marketplace.
3124. Non-executing Dealer Member best execution policies and procedures
         (1)     A Dealer Member that engages another Dealer Member to provide execution services on its
                 behalf may include in its policies and procedures for best execution a link to the executing Dealer
                 Member’s best execution disclosure to comply with its obligations under clause 3123(1)(ii) and
                 sections 3126 and 3129, provided that the non-executing Dealer Member’s policies and
                 procedures for best execution specifically address the following:
                 (i)     the non-executing Dealer Member must conduct an initial review of the best execution
                         disclosure of the executing Dealer Member and a review when material changes are made
                         to the disclosure, to provide reasonable assurance that the executing Dealer Member’s
                         policies and procedures for best execution are complete and appropriate for its clients,
                 (ii)    the non-executing Dealer Member must obtain an annual attestation from the executing
                         Dealer Member that it has complied with and tested its policies and procedures on best
                         execution in accordance with sections 3119 through 3129, and
                 (iii)   the non-executing Dealer Member must follow-up with the executing Dealer Member if it
                         identifies trade execution results that are inconsistent with the executing Dealer Member’s
                         best execution disclosure and document the results of its inquiry.
3125. Sending orders in bulk to foreign intermediaries
         (1)     A Dealer Member’s policies and procedures for best execution must not include the practice of
                 sending client orders in listed securities in bulk to a foreign intermediary for execution outside of
                 Canada, without considering other liquidity sources, including liquidity sources within Canada.
3126. Review of best execution policies and procedures
         (1)     A Dealer Member must review its best execution policies and procedures at least annually, and
                 whenever there is a material change to the trading environment or market structure that may
                 impact a Dealer Member’s ability to achieve best execution for its clients. The Dealer Member
                 must consider whether more frequent reviews of its policies and procedures on best execution
                 are necessary based on the size and scope its business.
         (2)     A Dealer Member must outline a process to review its policies and procedures on best execution,
                 including a description of its governance structure, that specifies the following:
                 (i)     who will conduct the review,
                 (ii)    what information sources will be used,
                 (iii)   the review procedures that will be employed,
                 (iv)    a description of any specific events that will trigger a review in addition to annual reviews,
                 (v)     how the Dealer Member evaluates whether its policies and procedures for best execution
                         are effective in achieving best execution, and
Series 3000 | Business Conduct and Client Accounts Rules                                                         Rule 3100
                                                                Investment Dealer and Partially Consolidated Rules

                 (vi)    who will receive reports of the results.
         (3)     A Dealer Member must retain records of its reviews of its policies and procedures on best
                 execution, including any material decisions made and any changes to them, in accordance with
                 the record retention requirements in section 3803.
         (4)     A Dealer Member must promptly correct any deficiencies identified in the course of its review of
                 its policies and procedures on best execution.
3127. Training
         (1)     A Dealer Member must have reasonable assurance its employees involved in the execution of
                 client orders and transactions know and understand how to apply the Dealer Member’s policies
                 and procedures for best execution that they must follow.
3128. Compliance with the Order Protection Rule
         (1)     Despite any instruction or consent of the client, best execution of a client order for a listed
                 security is subject to compliance with the Order Protection Rule under Part 6 of the Trading Rules
                 by:
                 (i)     the Marketplace on which the order is entered, or
                 (ii)    the Dealer Member, if the Dealer Member has marked the order as a directed-action order
                         in accordance with Universal Market Integrity Rule 6.2.
3129. Disclosure of best execution policies
         (1)     A Dealer Member must disclose to its clients in writing the following:
                 (i)     a description of the Dealer Member’s obligation under section 3120,
                 (ii)     a description of the factors the Dealer Member considers for the purpose of achieving best
                          execution of:
                         (a)     client orders for listed securities,
                         (b)     client orders for foreign-exchange traded securities,
                         (c)     client orders for listed derivatives,
                         (d)     client transactions in over-the-counter securities, and
                         (e)     client transactions in over-the-counter derivatives.
                 (iii)   a description of the Dealer Member’s order handling and routing practices intended to
                         achieve best execution of client orders for listed securities, that include the following:
                         (a)      the identity of any Marketplace to which the Dealer Member might route the client
                                  orders for handling or execution,
                         (b)      the identity of each type of intermediary (domestic or foreign) to which the Dealer
                                  Member might route the client orders for handling or execution,
                         (c)      the circumstances in which the Dealer Member might route client orders to a
                                  Marketplace or intermediary identified in sub-clause 3129(1)(iii)(a) or (b) above,
                         (d)      the circumstances, if any, under which the Dealer Member will move a client order
                                  entered on one Marketplace to another Marketplace,



Series 3000 | Business Conduct and Client Accounts Rules                                                          Rule 3100
                                                              Investment Dealer and Partially Consolidated Rules

                         (e)      the nature of any ownership by the Dealer Member or affiliated entity of the Dealer
                                  Member in, or arrangement with, any Marketplace or intermediary identified in sub-
                                  clause 3129(1)(iii)(a) or (b) above,
                         (f)      if any client orders may be routed to an intermediary identified in sub-clause
                                  3129(1)(iii)(b) above, pursuant to an arrangement with that intermediary, and
                         (g)      a statement that client orders will be subject to the order handling and routing
                                  practices of the intermediary identified in sub-clause 3129 (1)(iii)(b) above,
                 (iv)    a statement that the Dealer Member has reviewed the client order handling and routing
                         practices of the intermediary identified pursuant to sub-clause 3129(1)(iii)(b) and is
                         satisfied that it provides reasonable assurance of achieving best execution of client orders,
                 (v)     a statement as to:
                         (a)     whether fees are paid by the Dealer Member or payments or other compensation is
                                 received by the Dealer Member for a client order routed, or a trade resulting from a
                                 client order routed, to a marketplace or intermediary identified pursuant to
                                 subclauses 3129(1)(iii)(a) or 3129(1)(iii)(b) above,
                         (b)     the circumstances under which the costs associated with the fees paid by the Dealer
                                 Member or the compensation received by the Dealer Member will be passed on to
                                 the client, and
                         (c)     whether routing decisions are made based on fees paid by the Dealer Member or
                                 payments received by the Dealer Member,
                 and,
                 (vi)    if providing market data as a service to clients, a description of any market data that is
                         missing, including an explanation of the risks of trading with incomplete trading data.
         (2)     A Dealer Member must provide separate disclosure for each class or type of client and each class
                 or type of order or transaction if the factors and order handling and routing practices used for
                 such clients, orders and transactions materially differ.
         (3)     A Dealer Member must identify in the disclosure:
                 (i)     the class or type of client to which the disclosure applies,
                 (ii)    the class or type of securities or derivatives order or transaction to which the disclosure
                         applies, and
                 (iii)   the date of the most recent changes to the disclosure.
         (4)     A Dealer Member must make the disclosure:
                 (i)     publicly available on the Dealer Member’s website and clearly identify to clients where on
                         the website the disclosure can be found, or
                 (ii)    if the Dealer Member does not have a website, provide the disclosure in writing to the
                         client upon account opening.
         (5)     A Dealer Member must:
                 (i)     review the disclosure on a frequency that is reasonable in the circumstances, and at a
                         minimum on an annual basis, and
                 (ii)    promptly update the disclosure to reflect the Dealer Member’s current practices.

Series 3000 | Business Conduct and Client Accounts Rules                                                           Rule 3100
                                                              Investment Dealer and Partially Consolidated Rules

         (6)     If a Dealer Member makes any change to the disclosure, the Dealer Member must:
                 (i)     for the website disclosure, identify and maintain the change on its website for a period of
                         six months after the change has been made, or
                 (ii)    if the Dealer Member does not have a website, deliver the change to the client in writing no
                         later than the 90th day after the change has been made.
3130. – 3139. Reserved.

PART D: CLIENT IDENTIFIERS
3140. Identifying clients of a Non-Executing Dealer Member
         (1)     Where a non-executing Dealer Member is not acting for an order execution only account and
                 sends an order in a listed security to an executing Dealer Member for execution on a Marketplace
                 for which the Corporation is the regulation services provider, the non-executing Dealer Member
                 must include:
                 (i)      an identifier for the client for or on behalf of whom the order is entered, in the form of:
                         (a)     a Legal Entity Identifier for an order for an account supervised under Part D of
                                 Rule 3900,
                         (b)     an account number for all other client orders not included under sub-clause
                                 3140(1)(i)(a);
                 (ii)    the Legal Entity Identifier of the non-executing Dealer Member that is not a Participant.
         (2)     Where a non-executing Dealer Member is not acting for an order execution only account and
                 groups together orders from more than one client or account type for execution on a
                 Marketplace for which the Corporation is the regulation services provider:
                 (i)     sub-clause 3140(1)(i) does not apply, and
                 (ii)    the non-executing Dealer Member must provide to the executing Dealer Member that the
                         order is part of:
                         (a)     a bundled order,
                         or
                         (b)     a multiple client order.
         (3)     The non-executing Dealer Member that is not acting for an order execution only account and is not
                 a Participant must ensure that the registration status of its Legal Entity Identifier has not lapsed.
3141. – 3199. Reserved.




Series 3000 | Business Conduct and Client Accounts Rules                                                            Rule 3100
                                                                    Investment Dealer and Partially Consolidated Rules

RULE 3200 | KNOW‐YOUR‐CLIENT AND CLIENT ACCOUNTS

3201. Introduction
         (1)     Rule 3200 sets out Dealer Members’ obligations when opening new accounts and maintaining
                 existing accounts. Rule 3200 is divided into seven parts as follows:
                 Part A – Know‐Your‐Client and Client Identification Requirements:
                            sets out Dealer Members’ obligation to know and identify each client and to learn and
                            remain informed of the essential facts about each client, account and order accepted.
                            [sections 3202 through 3209]
                 Part B – Requirements for Client Accounts:
                            sets out the general account opening and updating procedures that, subject to certain
                            exceptions specified within the requirements, are applicable to all accounts.
                            [sections 3210 through 3222]
                 Part C – Advisory Accounts:
                            sets out requirements that apply where the account is an advisory account.
                            [section 3230]
                 Part D – Order Execution Only Accounts:
                            sets out requirements that apply where the account is an order execution only account.
                            [sections 3240 and 3241]
                 Part E – Margin Accounts:
                            sets out requirements that apply where the account is a margin account.
                            [sections 3245 through 3247]
                 Part F – Additional Account Opening and Updating Procedures for Derivatives Trading:
                             sets out additional account opening and updating procedures for derivatives accounts.
                            [sections 3250 through 3255]
                 Part G – Discretionary Accounts and Managed Accounts:
                            sets out requirements that apply where the account is either a discretionary account or a
                            managed account.
                            [sections 3270 through 3281]
         (2)     Rule 3200 applies to Dealer Members in addition to all other Corporation requirements. No part
                 of Rule 3200, unless otherwise specified, shall be interpreted to grant a Dealer Member an
                 exemption for complying with other Corporation requirements.
         (3)     The following terms have the meaning set out below when used in Part A – Know‐Your‐Client and
                 Client Identification Requirements and Part B – Requirements for Client Accounts:
                   ”financial exploitation”         means the use or control of, or deprivation of the use or control of, a financial
                                                    asset of an individual by a person through undue influence, unlawful conduct
                                                    or another wrongful act.



Series 3000 | Business Conduct and Client Accounts Rules                                                                     Rule 3200
                                                                    Investment Dealer and Partially Consolidated Rules

                   “trusted contact person”         means an individual identified by a client to a Dealer Member or Approved
                                                    Person whom the Dealer Member or Approved Person may contact in
                                                    accordance with the client’s written consent.
                   “vulnerable client”              means a client who might have an illness, impairment, disability or aging‐
                                                    process limitation that places the client at risk of financial exploitation.

         (4)     The following terms have the meaning set out below when used in Part D – Order Execution Only
                 Accounts:
                   ”adviser”                        means a person that is not an individual and is registered as an adviser in
                                                    accordance with securities laws.
                   ”foreign adviser                 means a person that is not an individual and is in the business of trading
                   equivalent”                      securities in a foreign jurisdiction in a manner analogous to an adviser.

PART A – KNOW‐YOUR‐CLIENT AND CLIENT IDENTIFICATION REQUIREMENTS
3202. Know Your‐Client
         (1)     A Dealer Member must take reasonable steps to learn and remain informed of the essential facts
                 relative to every order, account and client it accepts, and to:
                 (i)      establish the identity of a client and, if the Dealer Member has any cause for concern, make
                          reasonable inquiries as to the reputation of the client,
                 (ii)     establish whether the client is an insider of a reporting issuer or any other issuer whose
                          securities are publicly traded,
                 (iii)   ensure it has collected sufficient information regarding all of the following to enable it to
                         meet its obligations under Rule 3400:
                         (a)     the client’s:
                                 (I)      personal circumstances,
                                 (II)     financial circumstances,
                                 (III)    investment needs and objectives,
                                 (IV)     investment knowledge,
                                 (V)      risk profile, and
                                 (VI)     investment time horizon, and
                 (iv)    establish the creditworthiness of the client if the Dealer Member is financing the client’s
                         acquisition of a security.
         (2)     A Dealer Member must complete an account application for each new client in accordance with
                 the requirements set out in Rule 3200.
         (3)     Within a reasonable time after receiving the information collected under subsection 3202(1), a
                 Dealer Member must take reasonable steps to have a client confirm the accuracy of such
                 information.
         (4)     Concurrently with taking the reasonable steps under clause 3202(1) a Dealer Member must take
                 reasonable steps to obtain from the client the name and contact information of a trusted contact
                 person, and the written consent of the client for the Dealer Member to contact the trusted
                 contact person to confirm or make inquiries about any of the following:

Series 3000 | Business Conduct and Client Accounts Rules                                                                     Rule 3200
                                                              Investment Dealer and Partially Consolidated Rules

                 (i)     the Dealer Member’s concerns about possible financial exploitation of the client,
                 (ii)    the Dealer Member’s concerns about the client’s mental capacity as it relates to the ability
                         of the client to make decisions involving financial matters,
                 (iii)   the name and contact information of a legal representative of the client, if any,
                 (iv)    the client’s contact information.
         (5)     Subsection 3202(4) does not apply to a Dealer Member in respect of a client that is not an
                 individual.
3203. Identifying partnerships or trusts
         (1)     When opening an initial account for a partnership or trust, a Dealer Member must:
                 (i)     in the case of a trust, obtain the names and addresses of all trustees and all known
                         beneficiaries and settlors of the trust,
                 (ii)    establish the existence of the partnership or trust and the nature of its business,
                 (iii)   in accordance with the requirements set out in section 3206 establish the identity of each
                         individual that exercises control over the affairs of the partnership or trust, and
                 (iv)    not open a partnership or trust account unless it first obtains the information referred to in
                         clause 3203(1)(iii) and determines whether the individuals described in clause 3203(1)(iii)
                         and, in the case of a trust, any of the known beneficiaries of more than 10% of the trust are
                         insiders of a reporting issuer or any other issuer whose securities are publicly traded.
3204. Identifying corporations
         (1)     When opening an initial account for a corporation, a Dealer Member must:
                 (i)      obtain the names of all directors of the corporation within 30 days of opening the account,
                 (ii)     establish the existence of the corporation and the nature of its business,
                 (iii)    in accordance with the requirements set out in section 3206, establish the identity of any
                          individual who is the beneficial owner, or exercises direct or indirect control or direction, of
                          25% or more of the voting rights attached to the outstanding voting securities of the
                          corporation, and
                 (iv)     not open an account unless it identifies any such individual beneficial owners required
                          under clause 3204(1)(iii) and determines whether one or more of them are insiders of a
                          reporting issuer or any other issuer whose securities are publicly traded.
3205. Prohibition on shell banks
         (1)     A Dealer Member must not open or maintain an account for a shell bank, which is defined as a
                 bank that does not have a physical presence in any country.
         (2)     Subsection 3205(1) does not apply to a bank that is an affiliate of a bank, loan or trust company,
                 credit union, or other depository institution with a physical presence in Canada or in a foreign
                 country in which the institution is subject to supervision by a banking or other similar regulatory
                 authority.
3206. Establishing identity
         (1)     For each beneficial owner or individual described in subsections 3203(1)(iii) and 3204(1)(iii), the
                 Dealer Member must establish the identity of such individual by using such methods that allow

Series 3000 | Business Conduct and Client Accounts Rules                                                          Rule 3200
                                                               Investment Dealer and Partially Consolidated Rules

                 the Dealer Member to form a reasonable belief it knows the identity of the individual and by
                 taking reasonable measures to confirm the accuracy of the information obtained.
         (2)     The Dealer Member shall keep a record that sets out the information obtained and the measures
                 to confirm the accuracy of that information.
         (3)     The identity of such individual in subsection 3206(1) must be established as soon as practicable
                 but not more than 30 days after opening the account.
         (4)     If the identity of such individual referred to in subsection 3206(1) cannot be established within 30
                 days of opening an account, the Dealer Member must restrict the account solely to liquidating
                 trades, transfers, paying out funds or delivering securities. These account restrictions must
                 remain in place until the Dealer Member establishes the individual’s identity.
3207. Identification exceptions
         (1)     Sections 3203, 3204 and 3206 do not apply to:
                 (i)     An entity registered under securities laws to:
                         (a)     engage in the business of trading or advising in securities or derivatives, or
                         (b)     act as an investment fund manager,
                 (ii)    an investment fund that is regulated under securities laws,
                 (iii)   a Canadian financial institution (as described in sub‐section 3207(2) below),
                 (iv)    an affiliate of a Canadian financial institution (as described in sub‐section 3207(2) below), if
                         that affiliate carries out activities similar to that Canadian financial institution,
                 (v)     a Schedule III bank,
                 (vi)    a pension fund that is regulated by or under an Act of Parliament or the legislature of a
                         province,
                 (vii) an entity that is a Canadian public body, or a corporation that has minimum net assets of
                       $75 million on its last audited balance sheet and whose shares are traded on a Canadian
                       stock exchange or a stock exchange designated under section 262(1) of the Income Tax Act
                       (Canada), and operates in a country that is a member of the Financial Action Task Force. For
                       the purpose of clause 3207(1)(vii), the term “stock exchange” has the same interpretation
                       as used in the Income Tax Act (Canada), or
                 (viii) an entity that is an affiliate of a public body or a corporation referred to in paragraph (vii)
                        above and the financial statements of the entity are consolidated with the financial
                        statements of that public body or corporation.
         (2)     A Canadian financial institution includes:
                 (i)      an association governed by the Cooperative Credit Associations Act (Canada) or a central
                          cooperative credit society for which an order has been made under section 473(1) of that
                          Act, or
                 (ii)     a bank, loan corporation, trust company, trust corporation, insurance company, treasury
                          branch, credit union, caisse populaire, financial services cooperative, or league that, in each
                          case, is authorized by an enactment of Canada or a jurisdiction of Canada to carry on
                          business in Canada or a jurisdiction of Canada.


Series 3000 | Business Conduct and Client Accounts Rules                                                          Rule 3200
                                                                     Investment Dealer and Partially Consolidated Rules

3208. Exemptions from Know‐Your‐Client
         (1)     Clause 3202(1)(iii) and subsection 3209(4) do not apply in respect to:
                 (i)     an order execution only account,
                 (ii)    a direct electronic access account,
                 (iii)   an account maintained at a Dealer Member who is a carrying broker for that account or
                         who only provides trade execution, clearing, settlement or custody services or a
                         combination of these services to another Dealer Member, portfolio manager, exempt
                         market dealer or their respective clients, for that account, or
                 (iv)    an account held by an institutional client.
3209. Primary responsibility, delegation and obligation to keep current
         (1)     Compliance with the Corporation requirements relating to know‐your‐client is primarily the
                 responsibility of the Registered Representative, Portfolio Manager or Associate Portfolio Manager
                 assigned to the client account.
         (2)     The responsibility in subsection 3209(1) must not be delegated to any other person.
         (3)     A Dealer Member must take reasonable steps to keep current the information required under
                 Part A of Rule 3200, including updating the information within a reasonable time after the Dealer
                 Member becomes aware of a significant change in the client’s information required under section
                 3202.
         (4)     A Dealer Member must review the information collected under clause 3202(1)(iii) no less
                 frequently than once every 36 months, except for a managed account and a discretionary account
                 which must be reviewed no less frequently than once every 12 months.

PART B – REQUIREMENTS FOR CLIENT ACCOUNTS
3210. Definitions
         (1)     The following term has the meaning set out below when used in Rule 3200:
                  “Client account records”           Any information, disclosure statement or agreement the Dealer Member is
                                                     required to provide to or obtain from the client in accordance with
                                                     Corporation requirements or applicable laws including, but not limited to, the
                                                     following:
                                                     (i)   documentation supporting the conclusion that the client’s identity has
                                                           been verified,
                                                     (ii) documentation supporting the account appropriateness assessment,
                                                     (iii) know‐your‐client information collected in accordance with Corporation
                                                           requirements, and
                                                     (iv) the client’s account application.


3211. Account appropriateness
         (1)     Before a Dealer Member opens an account for a person, the Dealer Member must determine, on
                 a reasonable basis and putting the person’s interest first, that:

Series 3000 | Business Conduct and Client Accounts Rules                                                                   Rule 3200
                                                                Investment Dealer and Partially Consolidated Rules

                 (i)     this action is appropriate for the person, and
                 (ii)    the scope of products, services and account relationships which the person would have
                         access to within the account are appropriate for the person.
         (2)     Clause 3211(1)(ii) does not apply in respect to:
                 (i)      an order execution only account, or
                 (ii)     a direct electronic access account.
         (3)     Subsection 3211(1) does not apply in respect to:
                 (i)      an account maintained at a Dealer Member who is a carrying broker for that account or
                          who only provides trade execution, clearing, settlement or custody services or a
                          combination of these services to another Dealer Member, portfolio manager, exempt
                          market dealer or their respective clients, for that account, or
                 (ii)     an account held by a Dealer Member, regulated entity, exempt market dealer, portfolio
                          manager, bank, trust company or insurance company.

3212. Account information
         (1)     For each account, the Dealer Member must obtain and maintain the applicable client account
                 records.
         (2)     For each institutional client, the Dealer Member must verify that the client qualifies as an
                 institutional client.
         (3)     The Dealer Member must record the account number on the account application.
         (4)     Where accounts are received by the Dealer Member from an affiliated Dealer Member or an
                 affiliated Mutual Fund Dealer Member, the Dealer Member may use the documentation
                 maintained by the affiliate firm to meet the requirement in subsection 3212(1) provided:
                 (i)      the account offering and investment products and services to be made available to the
                          client at the Dealer Member are materially the same as those at the affiliate firm,
                 (ii)     the following fees and charges associated with the account offering and investment
                          products and services are the same or lower as those at the affiliate firm:
                         (a)     account service fees and charges the client will or may incur relating to the general
                                 operation of the account, and
                         (b)     charges the client will or may incur in making, disposing and holding investment
                                 products,
                 (iii)    the know‐your‐client information collected by the Dealer Member and the approach used
                          by the Dealer Member to assess the know‐your‐client information collected are materially
                          the same as at the affiliate firm, and
                 (iv)     the affiliate firm account agreement has an acceptable assignment clause that in substance
                          protects the client’s interests in the same manner as if the client had signed a new account
                          agreement with the Dealer Member.
3213. Account opening policies and procedures
         (1)     A Dealer Member’s policies and procedures must specifically address:


Series 3000 | Business Conduct and Client Accounts Rules                                                         Rule 3200
                                                            Investment Dealer and Partially Consolidated Rules

                 (i)     collecting and maintaining accurate, complete and up‐to‐date information about each
                         client and updating that information where there are significant changes, and
                 (ii)    ensuring the completion of client account records when opening new accounts.
         (2)     A Dealer Member must:
                 (i)     have policies and procedures to specifically address that documents supporting client
                         account records are received within a reasonable time after opening an account,
                 (ii)     have a system for recording pending account documentation and following up where it is
                          not received within a reasonable time,
                 (iii)    take specific action to obtain required documents that have not been received within 25
                          business days of opening the account, unless a shorter period is prescribed,
                 (iv)     have policies and procedures independent of the Registered Representative, Portfolio
                          Manager or Associate Portfolio Manager for verifying significant changes to client
                          information, and
                 (v)      have a system in place to record the review and approval by the designated Supervisor.
3214. Opening new client accounts
         (1)     A Dealer Member may only assign an account number to a new account if the full and accurate
                 name and address of the client who holds the account is known to the Dealer Member; the
                 complete account application must be received no later than the following business day.
         (2)     The designated Supervisor must not approve a new account unless all client account records have
                 been collected.
         (3)     A designated Supervisor must approve each new account no later than one business day after
                 completing the initial trade for the account.
         (4)     A Dealer Member may use an alternative procedure to approve new accounts on an interim basis,
                 provided the designated Supervisor provides final approval no later than one business day after
                 the initial trade.
         (5)      If a designated Supervisor does not approve a new account after the initial trade, the Dealer
                  Member must restrict the account to only liquidating trades, transfers out, paying out funds or
                  delivering securities to the client. These account restrictions must remain in place until the
                  designated Supervisor has provided final approval of the account.
         (6)     Before opening a new account for an employee of another Dealer Member, the Dealer Member
                 must obtain written approval from the other Dealer Member, and must designate the account as
                 non-client account.
3215. Updating client accounts
         (1)      The Dealer Member’s policies and procedures must specifically address that any significant
                 changes to client information are approved in the same manner that an account application is
                 approved for a new account.
         (2)     If a client’s Registered Representative, Portfolio Manager or Associate Portfolio Manager changes,
                 the Dealer Member’s procedures must require that:



Series 3000 | Business Conduct and Client Accounts Rules                                                     Rule 3200
                                                             Investment Dealer and Partially Consolidated Rules

                 (i)     the new Registered Representative, Portfolio Manager or Associate Portfolio Manager
                         verify the client information in the account application with the client as soon as
                         practicable to ensure the information is correct, and
                 (ii)    the new Registered Representative, Portfolio Manager or Associate Portfolio Manager and
                         the designated Supervisor acknowledge, in writing, that the account application was
                         reviewed and, if necessary, updated.
         (3)     Subject to subsection 3215(4), if the client’s account application was approved within the past 36
                 months, the Dealer Member may use a copy of a client’s current account application to record
                 any changes to a client’s information, but must have the Registered Representative, Portfolio
                 Manager or Associate Portfolio Manager and their Supervisor initial any changes.
         (4)     If the client’s managed account or discretionary account application was approved within the
                 past 12 months, the Dealer Member may use a copy of a client’s current managed account or
                 discretionary account application to record any changes to a client’s information, but must have
                 the Portfolio Manager or Associate Portfolio Manager and their Supervisor initial any changes.
         (5)     The Dealer Member must restrict the access of Registered Representatives, Portfolio Managers
                 and Associate Portfolio Managers and other persons to its systems in such a manner so as to
                 ensure that material client information cannot be changed without the required approval.
3216. Relationship Disclosure
         (1)     Objective of relationship disclosure requirements
                 This section establishes the minimum requirements for the provision of relationship disclosure
                 information to retail clients. Dealer Members are not required to provide relationship disclosure
                 to institutional clients.
                 Relationship disclosure information is a written communication from the Dealer Member to the
                 client describing the products and services offered by the Dealer Member, the nature of the
                 account and the manner in which the account will operate and the responsibilities of the Dealer
                 Member to the client.
         (2)     Frequency of provision of relationship disclosure information
                 Relationship disclosure information must be provided to each retail client:
                 (i)     at the time of opening an account or accounts, and
                 (ii)     when there is a significant change to the relationship disclosure information previously
                          provided to the client.
         (3)     Form of relationship disclosure information
                 (i)      Dealer Members have the choice of providing customized relationship disclosure
                          information to each client, or appropriate standardized relationship disclosure information
                          to separate classes of clients.
                 (ii)     Where standardized relationship disclosure information is provided to the client, the Dealer
                          Member must ensure that the disclosure is appropriate for the client. The relationship
                          disclosure information must accurately describe the account relationship the client has
                          entered into with the Dealer Member.


Series 3000 | Business Conduct and Client Accounts Rules                                                       Rule 3200
                                                                 Investment Dealer and Partially Consolidated Rules

                 (iii)   Where a client has more than one account, combined relationship disclosure information
                         may be provided to the client as long as the Dealer Member determines that the combined
                         disclosure is appropriate for the client in light of the relevant circumstances, including the
                         nature of the various accounts.
         (4)     Format of relationship disclosure information
                 (i)     The format of the relationship disclosure information is not prescribed but must:
                         (a)     be provided to the client in writing,
                         (b)     be written in plain language that communicates the information to the client in a
                                 meaningful way, and
                         (c)     include all the required content set out in subsection 3216(5), or, where specific
                                 information has otherwise been provided to the client by the Dealer Member, a
                                 general description and a reference to the other disclosure materials containing the
                                 required information.
                 (ii)    Dealer Members may choose to provide the relationship disclosure information as a
                         separate document or to integrate it with other account opening materials.
         (5)     Content of relationship disclosure information
                 (i)      The relationship disclosure information must be entitled “Relationship Disclosure”.
                 (ii)     Subject to clause 3216(5)(iii), the relationship disclosure information must contain the
                          following:
                         (a)     a general description of the types of products and services the Dealer Member will
                                 offer to the client including:
                                 (I)     a description of the restrictions on the client’s ability to liquidate or resell a
                                         security, and
                                 (II)    a statement of the investment fund management expense fees or other
                                         ongoing fees the client may incur in connection with a security or service the
                                         Dealer Member provides,
                          (b)     a general description of any limits on the products and services the Dealer Member
                                  will offer to the client including:
                                 (I)      whether the firm will primarily or exclusively provide proprietary products to
                                          the client, and
                                 (II)     whether there will be other limits on the availability of products or services,
                         (c)     a description of the account relationship that states:
                                 (I)      whether the account opened is an advisory account, a managed account or an
                                          order execution only account,
                                 (II)     whether the client is responsible for making investment decisions and, if so,
                                          the manner in which the client will instruct the Dealer Member to effect
                                          transactions for the account, and
                                 (III)    whether recommendations or advice will be provided to the client and, if so,
                                          the responsibilities and obligations of the Dealer Member and its employees for
                                          any recommendations or advice provided to the client,


Series 3000 | Business Conduct and Client Accounts Rules                                                                Rule 3200
                                                                   Investment Dealer and Partially Consolidated Rules

                         (d)     a description of the process used by the Dealer Member to determine suitability,
                                 including:
                                 (I)      a description of the approach used by the Dealer Member to assess the client’s
                                          personal and financial circumstances, investment needs and objectives,
                                          investment time horizon, risk profile and investment knowledge,
                                 (II)     a statement that the client will be provided with a copy of the “know‐your‐
                                          client” information that is obtained from the client and documented at time of
                                          account opening and when there are significant changes to the information,
                                 (III)    a statement that the Dealer Member will determine that any investment action
                                          it takes, recommends or decides on, for the client is suitable for the client and
                                          puts the client’s interest first, including when:
                                         (A)      securities are received into or delivered out of the client’s account by way
                                                  of deposit, withdrawal or transfer,
                                         (B)      there is a change in the Registered Representative, Portfolio Manager or
                                                  Associate Portfolio Manager responsible for the account,
                                         (C)      the Dealer Member becomes aware of a change in the retail client’s
                                                  information collected in accordance with subsection 3202(1) that could
                                                  result in the retail client’s account not satisfying subsection 3402(1),
                                         (D)      the Dealer Member becomes aware of a change in a security in the retail
                                                  client’s account that could result in the account not satisfying subsection
                                                  3402(1), or
                                         (E)      the Dealer Member reviews the retail client’s information in accordance
                                                  with subsection 3209(4),
                                 (IV)     a statement indicating whether or not the suitability of the investments held in
                                          the account will be reviewed in the case of other triggering events not
                                          described in paragraph 3216(5)(ii)(d)(III) and, in particular, in the event of
                                          significant market fluctuations,
                         (e)     a description of the client account reporting that the Dealer Member will provide,
                                 including:
                                 (I)      a statement indicating when trade confirmations and account statements will
                                          be sent to the client,
                                 (II)     a description of the Dealer Member’s minimum obligations to provide
                                          performance information to the client and a statement indicating when
                                          account position cost and account activity information will be provided to the
                                          client, and
                                 (III)    a statement indicating whether or not the provision of account percentage
                                          return information will be an option available to the client as part of the
                                          account service offering,
                         (f)     a statement indicating that any Dealer Member and Approved Person existing
                                 material conflicts of interest, and material conflicts of interest that are reasonably
                                 foreseeable, which are not avoided, will be addressed in the best interest of the


Series 3000 | Business Conduct and Client Accounts Rules                                                              Rule 3200
                                                               Investment Dealer and Partially Consolidated Rules

                                 client and will be disclosed, where required, to the client in a timely manner, upon
                                 identification of the conflict,
                         (g)     a general description of any benefits received, or expected to be received, by the
                                 Dealer Member or the Approved Person, from a person or company other than the
                                 Dealer Member’s client, in connection with the client’s purchase or ownership of a
                                 security through the Dealer Member,
                         (h)     a description of all account service fees and charges the client will or may incur
                                 relating to the general operation of the account,
                         (i)     a description of all charges the client will or may incur in making, disposing and
                                 holding investments by type of investment product,
                         (j)     a general explanation of the potential impact on a client’s investment returns from
                                 each of the fees and charges described in 3216(5)(ii)(a)(II), and 3216(5)(ii)(h) and (i),
                                 including the effect of compounding over time,
                         (k)     a listing of the account documents required to be provided to the client with respect
                                 to the account,
                         (l)     a description of the Dealer Member’s complaint handling procedures and a
                                 statement that the client will be provided with a copy of a Corporation approved
                                 complaint handling process brochure at time of account opening,
                         (m)     a general explanation of how investment performance benchmarks might be used to
                                 assess the performance of a client’s investments and any options for benchmark
                                 information that might be made available to the client by the Dealer Member,
                         (n)     a description of the circumstances under which a Dealer Member might disclose
                                 information about the client or the client’s account to a trusted contact person
                                 referred to in subsection 3202(4), and
                         (o)     a general explanation of the circumstances under which a Dealer Member or
                                 Approved Person may place a temporary hold under section 3222 and a description of
                                 the notice that will be given to the client if a temporary hold is placed or continued
                                 under that section.
                 (iii)    For order execution only accounts, the Dealer Member does not have to provide the
                          relationship disclosure information required under sub‐clause 3216(5)(ii)(d), provided that
                          disclosure is made in compliance with the requirements in section 3241.
         (6)     Review of relationship disclosure materials
                 (i)      The relationship disclosure information provided to the client must be approved by a
                          partner, Director, officer or designated Supervisor. This approval must occur regardless of
                          the form the relationship disclosure information takes. If the document is a standardized
                          document, the designated Supervisor must ensure that the correct document is used in
                          each client circumstance. If the relationship disclosure information is a customized for each
                          client, the designated Supervisor must approve each document.




Series 3000 | Business Conduct and Client Accounts Rules                                                            Rule 3200
                                                             Investment Dealer and Partially Consolidated Rules

3217. Leverage risk disclosure statement
         (1)     When opening a new account for a retail client, prior to making an initial recommendation to a
                 retail client to purchase securities using borrowed money, or when first becoming aware of a
                 retail client’s intention to purchase securities using borrowed money, a Dealer Member must:
                 (i)      provide each retail client with a copy of the leverage risk disclosure statement, and
                 (ii)     obtain the retail client’s positive acknowledgement that they are in receipt of the
                          disclosure statement referred to in clause 3217(1)(i).
         (2)     A Dealer Member is not required to comply with subsection 3217(1) where it has provided the
                 retail client with a leverage risk disclosure statement in accordance with subsection 3217(1)
                 within the last six months.
         (3)     A leverage risk disclosure statement must be in substantially the following words:
                          “Using borrowed money to finance the purchase of securities involves greater risk than
                          using cash resources only. If you borrow money to purchase securities, your responsibility
                          to repay the loan and pay interest as required by its terms remains the same even if the
                          value of the securities purchased declines.”
3218.    Pre‐trade disclosure of charges
          (1)     Before a Dealer Member accepts an instruction from a retail client to purchase or sell a security or
                  precious metals bullion or to transact in derivatives in an account other than a managed account,
                  the Dealer Member must disclose to the client:
                  (i)     the charges the client will be required to pay, directly or indirectly, in respect of the
                          purchase, sale or transaction, or a reasonable estimate if the actual amount of the charges
                          is not known to the firm at the time of disclosure,
                  (ii)    in the case of a purchase or other transaction to which deferred charges apply, that the
                          client might be required to pay a deferred sales charge on the subsequent sale or closing
                          transaction and the fee schedule that will apply,
                  (iii)   whether the firm will receive trailing commissions, and
                  (iv)    whether there are any investment fund management expense fees or other ongoing fees
                          that the client may incur in connection with the security.
          (2)      Subsection 3218(1) does not apply to a Dealer Member in respect of an instruction involving:
                 (i)      a client for whom the Dealer Member purchases, sells or transacts only as directed by a
                          registered adviser acting for the client.
3219. Client mail
         (1)     A Dealer Member’s hold‐mail account procedures for retail clients must, at a minimum, include
                 the following provisions:
                 (i)      a requirement that the Dealer Member obtain written authorization from the client to
                          “hold mail”,
                 (ii)     a requirement that limits the length of time that a “hold mail” order may remain in force
                          for no longer than six months, in any 12 month period, and
                 (iii)    a rule requiring the control and regular review of “hold mail” accounts by a Supervisor.

Series 3000 | Business Conduct and Client Accounts Rules                                                          Rule 3200
                                                               Investment Dealer and Partially Consolidated Rules

         (2)     Notwithstanding clause 3219(1)(ii), a longer period may be used if:
                 (i)     it is permitted by the Dealer Member’s policies and procedures,
                 (ii)     the Dealer Member has policies and procedures that specifically address the close
                          supervision of such accounts, and
                 (iii)    the appropriate Supervisor pre‐approves the extended period.
         (3)     A Dealer Member’s returned mail procedures for retail clients must at a minimum include the
                 following provisions:
                 (i)      a rule requiring the control and investigation by a person independent of the sales function,
                          but may be located within a business location, and
                 (ii)     a rule requiring that a record of all investigations and their results be maintained.
3220. Record keeping
         (1)     A Dealer Member must maintain records for each account that includes:
                 (i)      client account records,
                 (ii)     the name and address of the account guarantor, if applicable, and
                 (iii)    a signed trading authorization from the account holder authorizing a person, other than the
                          account holder, to give trading instructions for the account, if applicable.
         (2)     The Registered Representative, Portfolio Manager or Associate Portfolio Manager responsible for
                 an account must retain a current copy of each account application. This requirement can be
                 satisfied by a Dealer Member maintaining the information in an electronic application accessible
                 to the Registered Representative, Portfolio Manager or Associate Portfolio Manager.
         (3)     A Dealer Member must maintain all client account records in accordance with the record
                 retention requirements in section 3803.
         (4)     A Dealer Member must maintain a record of persons with trading authorization over one or more
                 client accounts and must ensure that such record is sufficient to allow the Dealer Member to
                 identify any persons with trading authorization for multiple clients or client accounts.

3221. Prohibition against discretionary trading
         (1)     For the purposes of Rule 3200, a Dealer Member must ensure that individuals trading on its
                 behalf do not engage in any discretionary trading, including time and price discretion, unless
                 discretion is exercised in a discretionary account or managed account in accordance with the
                 requirements set out in Part G of Rule 3200.
         (2)     Subsection 3221(1) does not apply to time and price discretion exercised in fulfilling the Dealer
                 Member’s best execution obligation relating to a client order for a specific amount or a specific
                 security.
3222. Conditions for temporary holds
         (1)     A Dealer Member or an Approved Person must not place a temporary hold on the basis of
                 financial exploitation of a vulnerable client, unless the Dealer Member reasonably believes all of
                 the following:
                 (i)      the client is a vulnerable client,


Series 3000 | Business Conduct and Client Accounts Rules                                                          Rule 3200
                                                              Investment Dealer and Partially Consolidated Rules

                 (ii)    financial exploitation of the client has occurred, is occurring, has been attempted or will be
                         attempted.
         (2)     A Dealer Member or an Approved Person must not place a temporary hold on the basis of a
                 client’s lack of mental capacity unless the Dealer Member reasonably believes that the client does
                 not have the mental capacity to make decisions involving financial matters.
         (3)     If a Dealer Member or an Approved Person places a temporary hold referred to in subsection
                 3222(1) or subsection 3222(2), the Dealer Member must do all of the following:
                 (i)     document the facts and reasons that caused the Dealer Member or Approved Person to
                         place, and if applicable, to continue the temporary hold,
                 (ii)    provide notice of the temporary hold and the reasons for the temporary hold to the client
                         as soon as possible after placing the temporary hold,
                 (iii)   review the relevant facts as soon as possible after placing the temporary hold, and on a
                         reasonably frequent basis, to determine if continuing the hold is appropriate,
                 (iv)    within 30 days of placing the temporary hold and, until the hold is revoked, within every
                         subsequent 30‐day period, do either of the following:
                         (a)     revoke the temporary hold,
                         (b)     provide the client with notice of the Dealer Member’s decision to continue the hold
                                 and the reasons for that decision.
3223. – 3229. Reserved.

PART C – ADVISORY ACCOUNTS
3230. Rules applicable to advisory accounts
         (1)     For the purposes of Rule 3200, a Dealer Member that opens an advisory account for a retail client
                 must comply with the requirements in Parts A through C of Rule 3200, and if applicable, Parts E
                 through G of Rule 3200.
         (2)     For the purposes of Rule 3200, a Dealer Member that opens an advisory account for an
                 institutional client must:
                 (i)     comply with the requirements in Parts A through C of Rule 3200, and if applicable, Parts E
                         through G of Rule 3200, with the exception of sections 3216 through 3219, and
                 (ii)    ensure the sub‐account files of an institutional client refer to the documentation contained
                         in the master file to which it is related.
3231. – 3239. Reserved.

PART D – ORDER EXECUTION ONLY ACCOUNTS
3240. Rules applicable to order execution only accounts
         (1)     For the purposes of Rule 3200, a Dealer Member that opens an order execution only account for a
                 retail client must comply with the applicable requirements in Parts A, B, D, E and F of Rule 3200.
         (2)     For the purposes of Rule 3200, a Dealer Member that opens an order execution only account for
                 an institutional client must:

Series 3000 | Business Conduct and Client Accounts Rules                                                        Rule 3200
                                                              Investment Dealer and Partially Consolidated Rules

                 (i)     comply with the applicable requirements in Parts A, B, D, E and F of Rule 3200, with the
                         exception of sections 3216 through 3219, and
                 (ii)    ensure the sub‐account files of an institutional client refer to the documentation contained
                         in the master file to which it is related.
3241. Order execution only account services
         (1)     A Dealer Member approved by the Corporation to provide order execution only account services
                 within either a separate legal entity or a separate business unit, must:
                 (i)     implement the policies and procedures required by Corporation requirements, and
                 (ii)    not allow its order execution only account service clients to:
                         (a)      use their own automated order system, as defined in securities laws, to generate
                                  orders to be sent to the Dealer Member or send orders to the Dealer Member on a
                                  pre‐determined basis, or
                          (b)     manually send orders or generate orders to the Dealer Member that exceed the
                                  threshold on the number of orders as set by the Corporation from time to time,
                 (iii)   not provide order execution only account services to any person that is not an individual and
                         is acting as and, registered or exempted from registration as a dealer in accordance with
                         securities laws, and trades on a Marketplace for which the Corporation is the regulation
                         services provider.
         (2)      Despite clause 3241(1)(iii), a Dealer Member may provide an order execution only account service
                  to a person that is exempted from registration as a dealer under section 8.4 of National
                  Instrument 31‐103.
         (3)     A Dealer Member approved by the Corporation to provide order execution only account services
                 must, prior to opening an order execution only account:
                 (i)      provide the following written disclosures to the client:
                         (a)     a statement confirming that the Dealer Member will not provide any
                                 recommendations to the client and that the client is solely responsible for making all
                                 investment decisions in the order execution only account,
                         (b)     a statement confirming that the Dealer Member will not be responsible for making a
                                 suitability determination for the client, as set out in sections 3402 or 3403 (other
                                 than as required by clauses 3402(3)(i) and 3403(4)(i)), and, in particular, that the
                                 Dealer Member will not consider the client’s personal and financial circumstances,
                                 investment needs and objectives, investment knowledge, risk profile, investment
                                 time horizon, nor other similar factors, and
                          (c)    a statement confirming that the Dealer Member will not be responsible for making a
                                 determination that the products and account types offered by the Dealer Member in
                                 the order execution only account are appropriate for the client,
                          and
                 (ii)     obtain a positive acknowledgement from the client, and each beneficial owner of the
                          account, confirming that the client, and each beneficial owner, has received and
                          understood the disclosures described in clause 3241(3)(i).


Series 3000 | Business Conduct and Client Accounts Rules                                                        Rule 3200
                                                               Investment Dealer and Partially Consolidated Rules

         (4)     The Dealer Member must maintain, in an accessible form, a record of the acknowledgement
                 obtained under clause 3241(3)(ii) in the following form:
                 (i)     the client’s signature or initials on a new client form or other document, specifically related
                         to the disclosure and acknowledgement,
                 (ii)     an electronic acknowledgement attached to the disclosure and acknowledgement text, or
                 (iii)    a tape recording of a verbal acknowledgement.
         (5)     The Dealer Member must ensure that a client identifier is assigned to each client that trades on a
                 Marketplace for which the Corporation is the regulation services provider whose trading activity
                 on Marketplaces for which the Corporation is the regulation services provider exceeds a daily
                 average of 500 orders per trading day in any calendar month.
         (6)     The Dealer Member must ensure that a unique identifier is assigned to any adviser that trades on
                 a Marketplace for which the Corporation is the regulation services provider and that:
                 (i)      is itself a client of the Dealer Member, or
                 (ii)     has been granted trading authority, direction or control over an account of a client of the
                          Dealer Member.
         (7)     The Dealer Member must ensure that a unique identifier is assigned to any foreign adviser
                 equivalent that trades on a Marketplace for which the Corporation is the regulation services
                 provider and that:
                 (i)      is itself a client of the Dealer Member, or
                 (ii)     has been granted trading authority, direction or control over an account of a client of the
                          Dealer Member.
         (8)     The client identifier required in subsection 3241(5), clause 3241(6)(i) and clause 3241(7)(i) must
                 be in the form of:
                 (i)      a Legal Entity Identifier for clients eligible to receive a Legal Entity Identifier under the
                          standards set by the Global Legal Entity Identifier System, or
                 (ii)     an account number for all other client orders not included under subsection 3241(5), clause
                          3241(6)(i) and clause 3241(7)(i).
         (9)     If an account number is used as the client identifier under clause 3241(8)(ii), the Dealer Member
                 must provide the account number and the name of the corresponding client to the Corporation.
         (10) The Dealer Member must provide each unique identifier assigned pursuant to clause 3241(6)(ii)
              and clause 3241(7)(ii) and the name of the corresponding firm to the Corporation.
         (11) For clients using an order execution only account that are not referred to under subsection
              3241(5), clause 3241(6)(i), or clause 3241(7)(i), the Dealer Member must use an account number
              as the client identifier.
         (12) The Dealer Member must ensure that each order in a listed security entered on a Marketplace for
              which the Corporation is the regulation services provider contains:
                 (i)      the Legal Entity Identifier of the Dealer Member if it is a non‐executing Dealer Member that
                          is not a Participant, and
                 (ii)     a designation to indicate the order is for an order execution only account.


Series 3000 | Business Conduct and Client Accounts Rules                                                             Rule 3200
                                                             Investment Dealer and Partially Consolidated Rules

         (13) The Dealer Member must ensure that each order in a listed security entered on a Marketplace for
              which the Corporation is the regulation services provider contains either:
                 (i)     the identifier required under subsection 3241(5), clause 3241(6)(i), clause 3241(7)(i) or
                         subsection 3241(11), or
                 (ii)    a designation to indicate the order is a bundled order or a multiple client order.
         (14) The Dealer Member must ensure that each order entered on a Marketplace for which the
              Corporation is the regulation services provider by or on behalf of a firm for whom a unique
              identifier must be assigned pursuant to clause 3241(6)(i) or clause 3241(7)(i) contains the unique
              identifier assigned to that firm.
         (15) The Dealer Member must ensure that each order entered on a Marketplace for which the
              Corporation is the regulation services provider by or on behalf of an account over which an
              adviser or foreign adviser equivalent has been granted trading authority, direction or control and
              an identifier was assigned pursuant to clause 3241(6)(ii) or clause 3241(7)(ii) contains the
              identifier assigned to that firm.
         (16) Despite the requirement to include a client identifier assigned under subsection 3241(5) on an
              order sent to a Marketplace:
                 (i)     if an adviser is assigned a unique identifier pursuant to clause 3241(6)(ii), each order
                         entered by or on behalf of an account, over which that adviser has been granted trading
                         authority, direction or control, on a Marketplace for which the Corporation is the regulation
                         services provider must contain the unique identifier assigned to that adviser, or
                 (ii)    if a foreign adviser equivalent is assigned a unique identifier pursuant to clause 3241(7)(ii),
                         each order entered by or on behalf of an account over which that foreign adviser
                         equivalent has been granted trading authority, direction or control, on a Marketplace for
                         which the Corporation is the regulation services provider must contain the unique identifier
                         assigned to that foreign adviser equivalent.
         (17) The non‐executing Dealer Member that is not a Participant must ensure that the registration
              status of its Legal Entity Identifier has not lapsed.
         (18) A Dealer Member approved by the Corporation to provide order execution only account services
              within either a separate legal entity or a separate business unit, must ensure that:
                 (i)     its order‐entry systems and records are capable of labeling all account documentation,
                         including monthly statements and confirmations, as “order execution only accounts” or
                         other similar phrase, and
                 (ii)    the client monthly statements of its order execution only account services are not
                         consolidated with any other client account statements, including those of any other
                         business unit of the Dealer Member or of the Dealer Member itself.




Series 3000 | Business Conduct and Client Accounts Rules                                                        Rule 3200
                                                              Investment Dealer and Partially Consolidated Rules

3242. – 3244. Reserved.

PART E – MARGIN ACCOUNTS
3245. Rules applicable to margin accounts
         (1)     For the purposes of Rule 3200, a Dealer Member that opens a margin account for a retail client
                 must comply with the requirements in Parts A, B and E of Rule 3200, and if applicable, Parts C, D,
                 F and G of Rule 3200.
         (2)     For the purposes of Rule 3200, a Dealer Member that opens a margin account for an institutional
                 client must:
                 (i)      comply with the requirements in Parts A, B and E of Rule 3200, and if applicable, Parts C, D,
                          F and G of Rule 3200, with the exception of sections 3216 through 3219, and
                 (ii)     ensure the sub‐account files of an institutional client refer to the documentation contained
                          in the master file to which it is related.
3246. Margin requirements ‐ when to extend margin to clients
         (1)     In deciding whether to allow a client to trade on margin, a Dealer Member must ensure that the
                 client is aware of the risks and benefits associated with trading on margin.
3247. Margin account agreement
         (1)     Prior to opening a margin account, a Dealer Member must:
                 (i)      deliver a margin account agreement to the client, and
                 (ii)     obtain a copy of the margin account agreement signed by the client.
         (2)     A Dealer Member’s margin account agreement must, at a minimum, contain a written description
                 of the following rights and obligations:
                 (i)      the client’s obligation to pay their indebtedness to the Dealer Member and to maintain
                          adequate margin,
                 (ii)     the client’s obligation to pay interest on debit balances in their account,
                 (iii)    the Dealer Member’s right to raise money on and pledge assets held in the client’s account,
                 (iv)     the extent to which the Dealer Member has the right to use free credit balances in the
                          client’s account for its own business or to cover debits in the same or other accounts,
                 (v)      the Dealer Member’s right to sell assets in the client’s account and make purchases to
                          cover short sales. If the client requires prior notice, the Dealer Member must set out the
                          nature of the notice and the client’s obligations to remedy any deficiency,
                 (vi)     the extent of the Dealer Member’s right, if any, to use a security in the client’s account for
                          delivery against a short sale,
                 (vii) the extent to which the Dealer Member has the right, if any, to use a security in the client’s
                       account for delivery against a short sale in an account owned or controlled by the Dealer
                       Member, a partner or Director,
                 (viii) the extent of the Dealer Member’s right to use assets in the client’s account and to hold
                        them as collateral for the client’s debt, and



Series 3000 | Business Conduct and Client Accounts Rules                                                          Rule 3200
                                                             Investment Dealer and Partially Consolidated Rules

                 (ix)    the Dealer Member’s obligation to carry out all transactions in accordance with Corporation
                         requirements and, where applicable, the requirements of the marketplace on which the
                         transaction has been executed.
3248. – 3249. Reserved.

PART F – ADDITIONAL ACCOUNT OPENING AND UPDATING PROCEDURES FOR DERIVATIVES TRADING
3250. Rules applicable to derivatives accounts
         (1)     For the purposes of Rule 3200, a Dealer Member that opens a derivatives account for a retail client
                 must comply with the requirements in Parts A, B and F of Rule 3200, and if applicable, Parts C, D, E
                 and G of Rule 3200.
         (2)     For the purposes of Rule 3200, a Dealer Member that opens a derivatives account for an
                 institutional client must:
                 (i)     comply with the requirements in Parts A, B and F of Rule 3200, and if applicable, Parts C, D,
                         E and G of Rule 3200, with the exception of sections 3216 through 3219, and
                 (ii)    ensure the sub‐account files of an institutional client refer to the documentation contained
                         in the master file to which it is related.
         (3)     A Dealer Member must ensure that persons trading on its behalf or advising clients in derivatives
                 accounts meet minimum proficiency requirements.
3251. Additional requirements when opening a derivatives account
         (1)     Before executing an initial derivatives transaction in an account, whether the account is an advisory
                 account, a discretionary account, a managed account or an order execution only account, a Dealer
                 Member must:
                 (i)      obtain a completed derivatives account application from the client,
                 (ii)    obtain a completed and signed derivatives trading agreement from the client,
                 (iii)    provide the client with the most recent derivatives disclosure statement or similar
                          disclosure document, and
                 (iv)     record the relevant designated Supervisors’ approval in writing.
         (2)     The relevant designated Supervisors must determine whether the risk characteristics of the
                 strategies the client intends to use are appropriate for the client and in keeping with their personal
                 and financial circumstances, investment needs and objectives, investment knowledge, risk profile,
                 investment time horizon and puts the client’s interest first. If they are not, the designated
                 Supervisors should restrict the account from using inappropriate strategies and note on the
                 derivatives account approval any trading restrictions imposed and communicate those restrictions
                 to the Registered Representative, Portfolio Manager or Associate Portfolio Manager assigned to
                 the account.
3252. Derivatives trading agreement
         (1)     A Dealer Member’s derivatives trading agreement must define the rights and obligations of the
                 Dealer Member and the client and, at a minimum, must include the following:
                 (i)      the time periods during which the Dealer Member accepts orders for execution,


Series 3000 | Business Conduct and Client Accounts Rules                                                        Rule 3200
                                                               Investment Dealer and Partially Consolidated Rules

                 (ii)    the Dealer Member’s right to:
                         (a)     exercise discretion in accepting orders,
                         (b)     impose trading or position limits or closeout positions under specified conditions,
                 (iii)   the extent of the Dealer Member’s right to:
                         (a)     use client free credit balances within its own business or to finance other client
                                 account debits,
                         (b)     use client account assets as collateral for the clients’ debit and position obligations,
                         (c)     raise money on and pledge assets held in the client’s account
                 (iv)     the conditions under which the Dealer Member may apply the client’s funds, securities or
                          other property in the account or any other accounts of the client to satisfy outstanding
                          debts or margin calls,
                 (v)      the Dealer Member’s obligation to:
                         (a)     if required under any applicable laws or requested to do so, provide information to
                                 regulators regarding position limit, exercise limit requirements and reporting
                                 derivative positions or derivative transactions related data,
                         (b)     obtain client consent before the Dealer Member may take the other side to the
                                 client’s transaction, and document whether the client provides such consent,
                         (c)     address situations when errors and omissions occur,
                 (vi)     where discretionary authority is given to the Dealer Member:
                         (a)     disclosures explaining the discretionary authority that has been given,
                         (b)     the client’s acknowledgement that is has consented to the giving of the authority,
                          provided the authority given is consistent with the requirements contained within Part G of
                          Rule 3200 and unless the authority is given through the execution of a separate
                          agreement,
                 (vii)    the client’s cumulative loss limit subject to the conditions set out in subsection 3252(2),
                 (viii) the client’s obligation to:
                          (a)     comply with Corporation requirements and the requirements of any entity through
                                  which the derivative is traded, cleared, or issued, including, without limitation,
                                  reporting, position limit and exercise limit requirements,
                          (b)     maintain adequate margin collateral and to pay any debts owed to the Dealer
                                  Member,
                          (c)     pay commission or other compensation, if any,
                          (d)     pay interest, if any, on account debit balances,
                 (ix)     the client’s acknowledgement of:
                          (a)     receiving the most recent derivatives risk disclosure statement,
                          (b)     their obligation to inform and update the Dealer Member of any circumstances
                                  under which they would be considered to be an insider of a reporting issuer or any
                                  other issuer whose securities are publicly traded,


Series 3000 | Business Conduct and Client Accounts Rules                                                           Rule 3200
                                                                 Investment Dealer and Partially Consolidated Rules

                 (x)      any other matter required by a derivatives trading, clearing or issuing entity,
                 (xi)     for options, futures contract options and similar derivatives:
                          (a)     the Dealer Member’s deadlines for a client to submit an exercise notice,
                          (b)     the method the Dealer Member will use to distribute assignment notices,
                          (c)     disclosures indicating that:
                                  (I)      the Dealer Member may set maximum limits on short positions,
                                  (II)     the Dealer Member may apply cash‐only terms during the last 10 days before
                                           expiry, and
                                  (III)    the Corporation may impose other rules affecting existing or subsequent
                                           transactions.,
                          (d)     the client’s obligation to instruct the Dealer Member to close out positions before
                                  expiry,
                 (xii)    for futures contracts, forward contracts, contracts for difference and similar derivatives,
                          disclosures indicating that the Dealer Member requires the client to maintain minimum
                          margin that is the greater of:
                          (a)     the amount the derivatives marketplace or clearing house prescribes,
                          (b)     Corporation’s requirements, or
                          (c)     the Dealer Member’s requirements.
         (2)     The client’s cumulative loss limit under clause 3252(1)(vii),
                 (i)      applies to an account, where the transactions involve futures contracts, forward contracts,
                          contracts for difference, futures contract options or similar derivatives, or highly‐leveraged
                          securities or derivatives,
                 (ii)     applies to an account, other than a hedging account, whether the account is an advisory
                          account, a discretionary account, a managed account or an order execution only account,
                          and
                 (iii)    must, notwithstanding obligations under Rule 3400, be determined on
                          (a)     a lifetime basis and validated with the client on an annual basis, or
                          (b)     an annual basis and updated annually.
3253. Letter of undertaking
         (1)     Instead of a derivatives trading agreement, a Dealer Member may obtain a letter of undertaking
                 for accounts where the client is classified as an institutional client.
         (2)     The letter of undertaking must state:
                 (i)      that the client agrees to comply with Corporation requirements, any applicable laws, and
                          the requirements of any entity through which the derivative is traded, cleared, or issued,
                          including, without limitation, position limit, exercise limit requirements and reporting
                          derivative positions or derivative transactions related data, and



Series 3000 | Business Conduct and Client Accounts Rules                                                         Rule 3200
                                                             Investment Dealer and Partially Consolidated Rules

         (ii)    if the client has an account that is charged interest on a debit balance, the conditions under
                 which transfers of the client’s funds, securities or other property may be made between
                 accounts, unless these conditions are acknowledged by the client in another document.
3254. Derivatives risk disclosure statement
         (1)     A Dealer Member must:
                 (i)      provide each derivatives retail client with the most recent derivatives risk disclosure
                          statement or other similar document, approved by Corporation before accepting an initial
                          derivatives order from the client,
                 (ii)     obtain the client’s acknowledgement of receipt of the statement or document provided
                          under clause 3254(1)(i),
                 (iii)    provide each derivatives retail client with any amendments to the statement or document
                          provided under clause 3254(1)(i),
                 (iv)     maintain a record of the names and addresses of all clients to whom it has provided the
                          statement, or similar document under clause 3254(1)(i) and any amendments under clause
                          3254(1)(iii) and the dates on which they were provided, and
                 (v)     include with the risk disclosure statement or other similar document, for each order
                         execution only account offering over-the-counter derivatives to retail clients, a disclosure of
                         the percentage of such accounts that were profitable for each of the four most recent
                         quarters.
3255. Position and exercise limits
         (1)     A Dealer Member must comply with the requirements of any entity through which the derivative
                 is traded, cleared, or issued, including, without limitation, reporting, position limit and exercise
                 limit requirements.
3256. Futures porting disclosures
         (1)     Where the client account is subject to a futures segregation and portability customer protection
                 regime, a Dealer Member must:
                 (i)     provide the client with a porting disclosure document on the benefits, risks and
                         requirements for porting, including the conditions for porting positions to a replacement
                         clearing member,
                 (ii)    obtain the client’s acknowledgement that the client has received and understood the
                         porting disclosure document or similar document described in clause 3256(1)(i), and
                 (iii)   notify the client of the obligation of the Dealer Member to provide the clearing corporation
                         with information and reports related to the client’s positions.
3257. – 3269. Reserved.

PART G – DISCRETIONARY ACCOUNTS AND MANAGED ACCOUNTS
3270. Definitions
         (1)     The following term has the meaning set out below when used in sections 3271 through 3281:


Series 3000 | Business Conduct and Client Accounts Rules                                                         Rule 3200
                                                                   Investment Dealer and Partially Consolidated Rules

                  “responsible person”                     A partner, Director, officer, employee or agent of a Dealer Member
                                                           who:
                                                           (i) exercises discretionary authority over the account of a client or
                                                               approves discretionary orders for an account when exercising
                                                               such discretion or giving such approval pursuant to sections 3273
                                                               through 3276, or
                                                           (ii) participates in the formulation of, or has prior access information
                                                                regarding investment decisions made on behalf of or advice given
                                                                to a managed account but does not include a sub‐adviser under
                                                                section 3279.

3271. Rules applicable to discretionary accounts and managed accounts
         (1)      For the purposes of Rule 3200, a Dealer Member that accepts a discretionary account or a
                  managed account for a retail client must comply with the requirements in Parts A, B and G of
                  Rule 3200, and if applicable, Parts C, E and F of Rule 3200.
         (2)     For the purposes of Rule 3200, a Dealer Member that opens a discretionary account or a
                 managed account for an institutional client must:
                 (i)      comply with the requirements in Parts A, B and G of Rule 3200, and if applicable, Parts C, E
                          and F of Rule 3200, with the exception of sections 3216 through 3219, and
                 (ii)     ensure the sub‐account files of an institutional client refer to the documentation contained
                          in the master file to which it is related.
         (3)      The Dealer Member must ensure that individuals trading or advising on its behalf, in discretionary
                  accounts or managed accounts, meet the applicable proficiency requirements.
3272. Reserved.

DISCRETIONARY ACCOUNTS
3273. Accepting a discretionary account
         (1)     To accept discretionary accounts:
                 (i)     the Dealer Member must designate one or more designated Supervisors, who meet the
                         proficiency requirements set out in Rule 2600, to be responsible for the discretionary
                         accounts,
                 (ii)    the Dealer Member’s policies and procedures must specifically address the supervision and
                         operation of discretionary accounts in accordance with Rule 3900,
                 (iii)   the Dealer Member must identify discretionary accounts in its books and records to allow
                         supervision of the discretionary accounts in accordance with Rule 3900,
                 (iv)     the Dealer Member must enter into a discretionary account agreement with the client prior
                          to accepting the account as a discretionary account,
                 (v)      the designated Supervisor must approve the account as a discretionary account and
                          approve the discretionary account agreement signed by the client, and
                 (vi)     the Dealer Member must maintain a record of the designated Supervisor’s approval in
                          accordance with the record retention requirements in section 3803.

Series 3000 | Business Conduct and Client Accounts Rules                                                                   Rule 3200
                                                             Investment Dealer and Partially Consolidated Rules

3274. Discretionary account agreement
         (1)     A discretionary account agreement must:
                 (i)     define the extent of the discretionary authority given to the Dealer Member by the client,
                 (ii)    include any restrictions on the discretionary authority,
                 (iii)   have a maximum term of no longer than 12 months,
                 (iv)    not be renewable, and
                 (v)     set out the terms of termination in accordance with subsection 3274(2).
         (2)     A discretionary account agreement may only be terminated by written notice:
                 (i)     by the client, effective when received by the Dealer Member, except for orders entered
                         prior to receipt of the notice, or
                 (ii)    by the Dealer Member, effective not less than 30 days from the date the Dealer Member
                         delivered the notice to the client.
3275. Persons authorized to affect discretionary trades
         (1)     A Registered Representative may only be authorized to affect trades for a discretionary account if:
                 (i)     the Registered Representative has at least two years of active experience in trading,
                         advising or performing analysis with respect to all types of products that are to be traded
                         on a discretionary basis, and
                 (ii)    the discretionary account is maintained at the Dealer Member on whose behalf the
                         Registered Representative, conducts business.
3276. Conflicts of interest
         (1)     A discretionary account must not hold any publicly traded securities of the Dealer Member or its
                 affiliates.
         (2)     A responsible person or a Dealer Member must not trade for his or her or the Dealer Member’s
                 own account, or knowingly permit or arrange any associate or affiliate to trade, in reliance upon
                 information relating to trades made or to be made in a discretionary account.
         (3)     A responsible person or a Dealer Member must not, without the prior written consent of the
                 client, knowingly allow a discretionary account to:
                 (i)     invest in a security or derivative of a security of an issuer if the individuals authorized under
                         subsection 3275(1) to deal with discretionary accounts is an officer or director of the issuer,
                         unless the position with the issuer is disclosed to the client, or
                 (ii)    invest in new issues or secondary offerings underwritten by the Dealer Member.
         (4)     A responsible person or a Dealer Member must not allow a discretionary account to provide a
                 guarantee or loan to a responsible person or an associate of a responsible person.

MANAGED ACCOUNTS
3277. Opening a managed account
         (1)     To accept managed accounts:
                 (i)      the Dealer Member must designate a Supervisor to be responsible for managed accounts,


Series 3000 | Business Conduct and Client Accounts Rules                                                          Rule 3200
                                                             Investment Dealer and Partially Consolidated Rules

                 (ii)    the Dealer Member’s policies and procedures must specifically address the supervision and
                         operation of managed accounts in accordance with Corporation requirements,
                 (iii)   the Dealer Member must enter into a managed account agreement with the client prior to
                         opening a managed account,
                 (iv)    the designated Supervisor must approve each managed account in writing,
                 (v)      the Dealer Member must retain a record of the designated Supervisor’s approval, and
                 (vi)     the Dealer Member must provide the client with a copy of its policy ensuring fair allocation
                          of investment opportunities.
3278. Managed account agreement
         (1)     The managed account agreement must:
                 (i)      describe or refer to the client’s personal and financial circumstances, investment
                          knowledge, investment time horizon, investment needs and objectives and risk profile that
                          are applicable to the managed account or accounts,
                 (ii)     describe any investment restrictions imposed by the client, where permitted by the Dealer
                          Member, and
                 (iii)    set out the terms of termination in accordance with subsection 3278(2).
         (2)     The managed account agreement may only be terminated by written notice:
                 (i)      by the client, effective on receipt by the Dealer Member, except for transactions entered
                          prior to receipt of the notice, or
                 (ii)     by the Dealer Member, effective not less than 30 days from the date the Dealer Member
                          delivered the notice to the client.
3279. Persons authorized to deal with managed accounts
         (1)     A Dealer Member must designate an individual authorized to deal with managed accounts who is:
                 (i)      a Portfolio Manager,
                 (ii)     an Associate Portfolio Manager, or
                 (iii)    a sub‐advisor with whom the Dealer Member has entered into a written sub‐advisor
                          agreement.
         (2)     The sub‐advisor in clause 3279(1)(iii) must be:
                 (i)      registered or licensed, or operating under an exemption from registration or licensing,
                          under securities laws of the jurisdiction in which its head office or principal place of
                          business is located, that permits it to carry on managed account activities, or its equivalent,
                          in such jurisdiction, and
                 (ii)     subject to legislation or regulations containing conflict of interest provisions at least
                          equivalent to those set out in section 3280 or has entered into an agreement with the
                          Dealer Member that it will comply with section 3280.
3280. Conflicts of interest
         (1)     A responsible person or a Dealer Member must not trade for their or the Dealer Member’s own
                 account, or knowingly permit or arrange any associate or affiliate to trade, in reliance upon
                 information relating to trades made or to be made in a managed account.

Series 3000 | Business Conduct and Client Accounts Rules                                                         Rule 3200
                                                              Investment Dealer and Partially Consolidated Rules

         (2)     A responsible person or a Dealer Member must not, without the prior written consent of the
                 client, knowingly allow a managed account to:
                 (i)      invest in a security or derivative of a security of an issuer that is related or connected to a
                          responsible person or to the Dealer Member,
                 (ii)    invest in a security or derivative of a security of an issuer if the individuals authorized under
                         subsection 3279(1) to deal with managed accounts is an officer or director of the issuer,
                         unless the position with the issuer is disclosed to the client, or
                 (iii)   invest in new issues or secondary offerings underwritten by the Dealer Member.
         (3)     A responsible person or a Dealer Member must not knowingly cause any managed account to:
                 (i)     purchase or sell a security or derivative of a security of an issuer from or to the account of a
                         Portfolio Manager, an Associate Portfolio Manager or an associate of a Portfolio Manager
                         or an associate of an Associate Portfolio Manager,
                 (ii)    purchase or sell a security or derivative of a security of an issuer from or to an investment
                         fund for which a responsible person acts as an adviser, or
                 (iii)   provide a guarantee or loan to a responsible person or an associate of a responsible person.
         (4)     A Dealer Member must fairly allocate investment opportunities among its managed accounts.
3281. Fees and remuneration
         (1)     A Dealer Member may not charge a client directly for services rendered to the managed account,
                 that is:
                 (i)      based upon the volume or value of transactions in the account initiated for the account, or
                 (ii)     contingent upon profit or performance of the client’s account,
                 unless the client has provided the Dealer Member with a written agreement which sets out the
                 manner in which the fees may be charged based on volume or value of transactions or contingent
                 upon profit or performance.
         (2)     A Dealer Member must not compensate a person referred to in section 3279, on the basis of the
                 value or volume of transactions in the account.
3282. – 3299. Reserved.




Series 3000 | Business Conduct and Client Accounts Rules                                                            Rule 3200
                                                              Investment Dealer and Partially Consolidated Rules

RULE 3300 | PRODUCT DUE DILIGENCE AND KNOW-YOUR-PRODUCT

3301. Product Due Diligence
         (1)     A Dealer Member must not make securities or derivatives available to clients unless the Dealer
                 Member has taken reasonable steps to:
                 (i)     assess the relevant aspects of the securities or derivatives, including the securities’ or
                         derivatives’ structure, features, risks, initial and ongoing costs and the impact of those costs,
                 (ii)    approve the securities or derivatives to be made available to clients, and
                 (iii)   monitor the securities or derivatives for significant changes.
         (2)     An Approved Person must not purchase securities or derivatives for, or recommend securities or
                 derivatives to, a client unless the securities or derivatives have been approved by the Dealer
                 Member to be made available to clients under subsection 3301(1).
3302. Know-Your-Product
         (1)     An Approved Person of a Dealer Member must not purchase or sell securities or transact in
                 derivatives for, or recommend securities or derivatives to, a client unless the Approved Person
                 takes steps to understand the securities or derivatives, including the securities’ or derivatives’
                 structure, features, risks, initial and ongoing costs and the impact of those costs.
         (2)     For purposes of subsection 3302(1), the steps required to understand the securities or derivatives
                 are those that are reasonable to enable the Approved Person to meet their obligations under Rule
                 3400.
3303. Exemptions from Product Due Diligence and Know-Your-Product
         (1)     Section 3301 does not apply in respect to an account maintained at a Dealer Member who is a
                 carrying broker for that account or who only provides trade execution, clearing, settlement or
                 custody services or a combination of these services to another Dealer Member, portfolio manager,
                 exempt market dealer or their respective clients, for that account.
         (2)     Section 3302 does not apply in respect to:
                 (i)     an order execution only account,
                 (ii)    a direct electronic access account, or
                 (iii)   an account maintained at a dealer member who is a carrying broker for that account or who
                         only provides trade execution, clearing, settlement or custody services or a combination of
                         these services to another dealer member, portfolio manager, exempt market dealer or their
                         respective clients, for that account.
3304. - 3399. Reserved.




Series 3000 | Business Conduct and Client Accounts Rules                                                          Rule 3300
                                                               Investment Dealer and Partially Consolidated Rules


RULE 3400 | SUITABILITY DETERMINATION

3401. Introduction
         (1)     Rule 3400 sets out a Dealer Member’s suitability determination obligations in dealing with clients.
3402. Retail client suitability determination requirements
         (1)     Before a Dealer Member purchases, sells, withdraws, exchanges or transfers-out securities or
                 precious metals bullion, or transacts in derivatives for a retail client’s account, takes any other
                 investment action for a client, makes a recommendation or exercises discretion to take any such
                 action, the Dealer Member must determine, on a reasonable basis, that the action satisfies the
                 following criteria:
                 (i)     the action is suitable for the retail client, based on the following factors:
                         (a)     the retail client’s information collected in accordance with section 3202,
                         (b)     the Dealer Member’s assessment of and an Approved Person’s
                                 understanding of the security, derivative or precious metals bullion, required in
                                 accordance with Rule 3300,
                         (c)     the impact of the action on the retail client’s account, including the concentration of
                                 securities, derivatives or precious metals bullion, within the account and the liquidity
                                 of those securities, derivatives or precious metals bullion,
                         (d)     the potential and actual impact of costs on the retail client’s returns, and
                         (e)     a consideration of a reasonable range of alternative actions available to the Registered
                                 Representative, Portfolio Manager, or Associate Portfolio Manager through the Dealer
                                 Member at the time the determination is made, and
                 (ii)    the action puts the retail client’s interest first.
         (2)     A Dealer Member must review the retail client’s account and the securities, derivatives or precious
                 metals bullion, in the retail client’s account to determine whether the criteria in subsection
                 3402(1) are met, and take reasonable steps, within a reasonable time, after any of the following
                 events:
                 (i)     securities, derivatives or precious metals bullion are received or delivered into the client’s
                         account by way of deposit or transfer-in,
                 (ii)    a Registered Representative, Portfolio Manager or Associate Portfolio Manager is
                         designated as responsible for the account,
                 (iii)   the Dealer Member becomes aware of a change in the retail client’s information collected in
                         accordance with subsection 3202(1) that could result in a security, derivative or precious
                         metals bullion, or the retail client’s account not satisfying subsection 3402(1),
                 (iv)    the Dealer Member becomes aware of a change in a security, derivative or precious metals
                         bullion, in the retail client’s account that could result in the security, derivative or precious
                         metals bullion, or account not satisfying subsection 3402(1), or
                 (v)     the Dealer Member reviews the retail client’s information in accordance with subsection
                         3209(4).
         (3)     A Dealer Member must determine, on a reasonable basis and putting the retail client’s interest



Series 3000 | Business Conduct and Client Accounts Rules                                                           Rule 3400
                                                             Investment Dealer and Partially Consolidated Rules


                 first, that:
                 (i)     it is suitable for the retail client to continue having an account with the Dealer Member, and
                 (ii)    the scope of products, services and account relationships which the retail client has access
                         to within the account are suitable for the retail client.
         (4)     When making a suitability determination pursuant to subsection 3402(1), a Dealer Member must
                 determine, on a reasonable basis, that the retail client’s account portfolio of investments that
                 would result from the investment action the Dealer Member takes, recommends or exercises
                 discretion to take is suitable for the retail client and puts the retail client’s interest first.
         (5)     Despite subsection 3402(1), if a Dealer Member receives an instruction from a retail client to take
                 an action that, if taken, does not satisfy subsections 3402(1), the Dealer Member may carry out the
                 retail client’s instruction if the Dealer Member has:
                 (i)     informed the retail client of the basis for the determination that the action will not satisfy
                         subsection 3402(1) and advised the client against proceeding with the order,
                 (ii)    recommended to the retail client an alternative action that satisfies subsection3402(1), and
                 (iii)   received recorded confirmation of the retail client’s instruction to proceed with the action
                         despite the determination referred to in clause 3402(5)(i).
3403. Institutional client suitability determination requirements
         (1)     Subject to the applicable exemptions set out in section 3404, a suitability determination must be
                 made for an institutional client:
                 (i)     before any order is accepted from the client, and
                 (ii)    before a recommendation is made to the client to purchase, sell, exchange or hold a
                         security or precious metals bullion, or transact in any derivative.
         (2)     When a suitability determination must be made for an institutional client pursuant to subsection
                 3403(1), a Dealer Member must make a determination whether the client is sufficiently
                 sophisticated and capable of making its own investment decisions in order to determine the level
                 of suitability owed to that institutional client. In making a determination whether a client is
                 capable of independently evaluating investment risk and is exercising independent judgment,
                 relevant considerations include:
                 (i)     any written or oral understanding that exists between a Dealer Member and its client
                         regarding the client’s reliance on the Dealer Member,
                 (ii)    the presence or absence of a pattern of acceptance of the Dealer Member’s
                         recommendations,
                 (iii)   the use by a client of ideas, suggestions, market views and information obtained from other
                         Dealer Members, market professionals or issuers particularly those relating to the same
                         type of securities, derivatives or precious metals bullion,
                 (iv)    the use of one or more investment dealers, portfolio managers or other third-party
                         advisors,
                 (v)     the general level of experience of the client in financial markets,
                 (vi)    the specific experience of the client with the type of instrument under consideration,
                         including the client’s ability to independently evaluate how market developments would



Series 3000 | Business Conduct and Client Accounts Rules                                                        Rule 3400
                                                               Investment Dealer and Partially Consolidated Rules


                         affect the security, derivative or precious metals bullion and ancillary risks such as currency
                         rate risk, and
                 (vii) the complexity of the securities, derivatives or precious metals bullion involved.
         (3)     Once each suitability determination has been made and:
                 (i)     the Dealer Member has reasonable grounds for concluding that the institutional client is
                         capable of making an independent investment decision and independently evaluating the
                         investment risk, then the Dealer Member’s suitability obligation is fulfilled for that
                         transaction, or
                 (ii)    the Dealer Member does not have reasonable grounds for concluding that the institutional
                         client is capable of making an independent investment decision and independently
                         evaluating the investment risk, then the Dealer Member must take steps to ensure that the
                         institutional client fully understands the investment product, including the potential risks.
         (4)     A Dealer Member must determine, on a reasonable basis and putting the institutional client’s
                 interest first, that:
                 (i)     it is suitable for the institutional client to continue having an account with the Dealer
                         Member, and
                 (ii)    the scope of products, services and account relationships which the institutional client has
                         access to within the account are suitable for the institutional client.
3404. Exemptions from the suitability determination requirements
         (1)     Other than clauses 3402(3)(i) and 3403(4)(i), sections 3402 or 3403 do not apply in respect to:
                 (i)     an order execution only account, or
                 (ii)    a direct electronic access account.
         (2)     Sections 3402 and 3403 do not apply in respect to an account maintained at a Dealer Member who
                 is a carrying broker for that account or who only provides trade execution, clearing, settlement or
                 custody services or a combination of these services to another Dealer Member, portfolio manager,
                 exempt market dealer or their respective clients, for that account.
         (3)     Other than subsection 3403(4), section 3403 does not apply in respect to:
                 (i)     an account held by a Dealer Member, regulated entity, exempt market dealer, portfolio
                         manager, bank, trust company or insurance company, or
                 (ii)    an account held by a non-individual institutional client that:
                         (a)     is also a “permitted client”, as defined in National Instrument 31-103,
                         (b)     is not a client described in clause 3404(3)(i), and
                         (c)     has waived, in writing, the protections offered to them under subsections 3403(1)
                                 and 3403(2).
         (4)     Subsection 3403(4) does not apply to an account held by an institutional client who is a Dealer
                 Member, regulated entity, exempt market dealer, portfolio manager, bank, trust company or
                 insurance company.
3405. Reserved.




Series 3000 | Business Conduct and Client Accounts Rules                                                         Rule 3400
                                                           Investment Dealer and Partially Consolidated Rules


3406. Primary responsibility and delegation
         (1)     Compliance with Corporation requirements relating to suitability determination is primarily the
                 responsibility of the Registered Representative, Portfolio Manager or Associate Portfolio Manager
                 assigned to the client account.
         (2)     Registered Representatives, Portfolio Managers and Associate Portfolio Managers must not
                 delegate their responsibility for suitability assessment obligations to any other person.
3407 - 3499. Reserved.




Series 3000 | Business Conduct and Client Accounts Rules                                                  Rule 3400
                                                                     Investment Dealer and Partially Consolidated Rules


RULE 3500 | SALES PRACTICES

3501. Introduction
         (1)     Rule 3500 sets out minimum standards that Dealer Members must follow in their dealings with
                 clients and when developing policies and procedures that specifically address sales practices.
3502. Definitions
         (1)     The following terms have the meaningset out below when used in Rule 3500:
                   “commencement of                   The time when a Dealer Member has had distribution discussions which are
                   distribution”                      of sufficient specificity that it is reasonable to expect that the Dealer Member
                                                      (alone or with other underwriters) will propose an underwriting of equity
                                                      securities to the issuer or selling security-holder.
                   “distribution”                     The same meaning as defined under securities laws and includes a
                                                      distribution pursuant to a bought deal agreement.
                   “distribution discussions”         Discussions by a Dealer Member with an issuer or a selling security-holder, or
                                                      with another underwriter that has had discussions with an issuer or selling
                                                      security-holder, concerning a distribution.

3503. Client priority
         (1)     A Dealer Member must give priority to client orders or transactions over all other orders or
                 transactions for the same security, derivative or precious metals bullion at the same price.
         (2)     The Dealer Member must not give priority to orders or transactions for an account in which the
                 Dealer Member or an employee or Approved Person of the Dealer Member has a direct or indirect
                 interest, other than an interest in the commission charged.
         (3)     Where investment decisions are made centrally and applied across a number of managed
                 accounts, subsections 3503(1) and 3503(2) do not apply to the managed accounts of partners,
                 Directors, officers, employees or Approved Persons of a Dealer Member who participate in a
                 managed account program on the same basis as client accounts.
3504. Commission fees, service fees and other account related fees
         (1)     Upon the opening of an account, or 60 days prior to any fee being charged with respect to the
                 account, a Dealer Member must provide each client with a fee schedule relating to any:
                 (i)     fixed dollar or fixed percentage commission fees,
                 (ii)    service fees,
                 (iii)   administrative fees, and
                 (iv)    other account charges.
         (2)     A Dealer Member who charges any of the fees identified in subsection 3504(1) may not charge a
                 higher fee unless it has given 60 days’ notice of this change to its clients.
         (3)     The requirements set out in subsections 3504(1) and (2) do not apply to accounts of institutional
                 clients.




Series 3000 | Business Conduct and Client Accounts Rules                                                                     Rule 3500
                                                           Investment Dealer and Partially Consolidated Rules


         (4)     The disclosure requirements set out in subsections 3504(1) and (2) do not apply to interest
                 charged by a Dealer Member in respect of an account.
         (5)     A Dealer Member may not charge a client a fee that is contingent upon the profit or performance
                 of the client’s account, unless specifically permitted under Corporation requirements.
3505. Payment of commission fees
         (1)     Unless otherwise permitted under securities laws, a Dealer Member must not pay any
                 commission fees or other fees in connection with payments received from a client or issuer, to
                 any person other than a Registered Representative, Investment Representative, Portfolio Manager
                 or Associate Portfolio Manager.
3506. During the period of distribution
         (1)     During the period of distribution, a Dealer Member who participates in a distribution as an
                 underwriter or as a member of a banking or selling group, must not offer for sale or accept any
                 offer to buy all or any part of those securities at a price higher than the stated initial public
                 offering price of the securities, and
         (2)     This obligation continues until the Dealer Member has notified the applicable securities
                 commission that its role in the distribution has ended.
3507. New issues
         (1)     For the purpose of section 3507, the term "normal investment practice" does not include an
                 account that has regularly purchased "hot issues" based on the history of investments in that
                 account with the Dealer Member.
         (2)     A Dealer Member must make a bona fide offering of the total amount of its participation in a new
                 issue to public investors.
         (3)     Public investors do not include an officer or employee of a bank, insurance company, trust
                 company, investment fund, pension fund or similar institutional body or the immediate families
                 of an officer or employee of these institutions regularly engaged in the purchase or sale of
                 securities for such institution unless:
                 (i)     the purchases are demonstrated to be for bona fide personal investment, and
                 (ii)    are made in accordance with the person’s normal investment practice.
3508. Inside information
         (1)     For the purpose of section 3508 “material non-public information” means material facts or
                 material changes not generally disclosed as defined under securities laws.
         (2)     A Director, Executive or employee of a Dealer Member acting as a director to a reporting issuer is
                 a person in a special relationship with the reporting issuer and must not disclose any material
                 non-public information about the reporting issuer to anyone including any Directors, Executives,
                 employees or clients, or research or trading departments of the Dealer Member unless in the
                 necessary course of business.
         (3)     A representative of a Dealer Member acting in an underwriting or advisory capacity to a reporting
                 issuer is a person in a special relationship with the reporting issuer and must not disclose any
                 material non-public information about the reporting issuer to anyone including any Directors,



Series 3000 | Business Conduct and Client Accounts Rules                                                     Rule 3500
                                                            Investment Dealer and Partially Consolidated Rules


                 Executives, employees or clients, or research or trading departments of the Dealer Member
                 unless in the necessary course of business.
         (4)     When a Dealer Member, Director, Executive or employee of a Dealer Member has material non-
                 public information about the issuer and discloses it to other personnel of the Dealer Member in
                 the necessary course of business, those persons also become persons in a special relationship
                 with the reporting issuer and must not disclose any material non-public information about the
                 reporting issuer to anyone including any Directors, Executives, employees or clients, or research
                 or trading departments of the Dealer Member unless in the necessary course of business.
         (5)     A Dealer Member’s policies and procedures must specifically address maintaining the
                 confidentiality of material non-public information.
3509. Premarketing
         (1)     In subsections 3509(2), 3509(4) and 3509(5), an “informed person” refers to any employee or
                 Approved Person of a Dealer Member who:
                 (i)     participated in or had actual knowledge of the distribution discussions, or
                 (ii)    acts on information provided by or is directed by, induced by, or otherwise receives
                         suggestions from a person who directly or indirectly participated in or had actual
                         knowledge of the distribution discussions.
         (2)     An informed person must not solicit expressions of interest from the public, in the type of
                 securities subject to distribution discussions, from the commencement of distribution discussions
                 until the earliest of:
                 (i)     the issuance of a receipt for the preliminary prospectus,
                 (ii)    a press release issued and filed in accordance with applicable laws, announcing the signing
                         of an enforceable agreement in respect of the potential distribution, and
                 (iii)   the Dealer Member deciding not to pursue the potential distribution.
         (3)     For the purpose of clause 3509(2)(ii), a press release will be deemed to have been issued when it
                 is released to a news distribution service for distribution and will be deemed to have been filed
                 when delivered or sent to the relevant provincial securities regulatory authority, in accordance
                 with securities laws.
         (4)     An informed person must not engage, direct, suggest or induce another informed person to
                 engage in market making or other principal trading activities in securities that are the subject of
                 distribution discussions.
         (5)     Where a Dealer Member and issuer or selling security-holder can show a bona fide intention to
                 distribute the equity securities pursuant to a prospectus exemption:
                 (i)     the Dealer Member including the informed person will not be subject to the restrictions in
                         subsection 3509(2),
                 (ii)    notwithstanding clause 3509(5)(i), the restrictions in subsection 3509(2) will apply from the
                         time it is reasonable to expect that a decision to abandon an exempt offering of equity
                         securities in favor of a prospectus offering will be taken.
         (6)     A Dealer Member involved in a distribution as an underwriter must:




Series 3000 | Business Conduct and Client Accounts Rules                                                        Rule 3500
                                                            Investment Dealer and Partially Consolidated Rules


                  (i)     maintain policies and procedures that specifically address compliance with the obligations
                          under section 3509, and
                  (ii)    monitor the Dealer Member, its employees and Approved Persons compliance with these
                          policies and procedures.
3510. - 3599. Reserved.




Series 3000 | Business Conduct and Client Accounts Rules                                                      Rule 3500
                                                               Investment Dealer and Partially Consolidated Rules

RULE 3600 | COMMUNICATIONS WITH THE PUBLIC

3601. Introduction
         (1)     A Dealer Member’s policies and procedures must specifically address communication with the
                 public and the Dealer Member must monitor compliance with these policies and procedures to
                 provide reasonable assurance the Dealer Member, its employees and Approved Persons comply
                 with the policies and procedures.
         (2)     Rule 3600 is divided into the following parts:
                  Part A – Advertisements, sales literature and correspondence
                             [section 3602]
                  Part B – Research reports
                             [sections 3606 through 3623]
                  Part C – Misleading Communications
                             [section 3640]

PART A – ADVERTISEMENTS, SALES LITERATURE AND CORRESPONDENCE
3602. Advertising
         (1)     A Dealer Member must not issue, participate in or knowingly allow the use of its name in any
                 advertisement, sales literature or correspondence that:
                 (i)     contains an untrue statement or omission of a material fact or is otherwise false or
                         misleading,
                 (ii)    contains an unjustified promise of specific results,
                 (iii)   uses unrepresentative statistics to suggest unwarranted or exaggerated conclusions, or fails
                         to identify the material assumptions made in arriving at these conclusions,
                 (iv)    contains any opinion or forecast of future events which is not clearly labeled as such,
                 (v)     fails to fairly present the potential risks to the client,
                 (vi)    is detrimental to the interests of the public, the Corporation or its Dealer Members, or
                 (vii) fails to comply with Corporation requirements or any applicable laws.
         (2)     A Dealer Member’s policies and procedures must specifically address the review and supervision
                 of advertisements, sales literature and correspondence relating to its business.
         (3)     A Dealer Member must ensure that the following items are approved by a designated Supervisor
                 before use or publication:
                 (i)     research reports,
                 (ii)    market letters,
                 (iii)   telemarketing scripts,
                 (iv)     promotional seminar texts (excluding educational seminar texts),
                 (v)      original advertisements or original template advertisements, and
                 (vi)     any material containing performance reports or summaries that is used to solicit clients.


Series 3000 | Business Conduct and Client Accounts Rules                                                        Rule 3600
                                                                    Investment Dealer and Partially Consolidated Rules

         (4)     A Dealer Member must ensure that all advertising, sales literature or correspondence not listed in
                 subsection 3602(3) is reviewed in a manner appropriate to the type of material through:
                 (i)     pre-use approval,
                 (ii)    post-use review, or
                 (iii)   post-use sampling.
         (5)     A Dealer Member must provide reasonable assurance:
                 (i)     its employees and Approved Persons are familiar with its policies and procedures relating to
                         advertisements, sales literature and correspondence, and
                 (ii)    its policies and procedures include specific ongoing measures to provide reasonable
                         assurance its policies and procedures are being complied with.
         (6)     A Dealer Member must retain copies of all advertisements, sales literature and correspondence
                 and all records of supervision for the period set out in section 3803. These items must be readily
                 available for inspection by the Corporation.
3603. – 3605. Reserved.

PART B – RESEARCH REPORTS
3606. Definitions
         (1)     The following terms have the meaning set out below when used in Part B of Rule 3600:
                  “analyst”                         A Dealer Member’s employee or Approved Person who is held out to the public
                                                    as an analyst or whose responsibilities to the Dealer Member include the
                                                    preparation, for distribution to clients or prospective clients, of any written
                                                    report, which includes a recommendation with respect to a security.
                  “equity related security”         A security whose performance is based on the performance of an underlying
                                                    equity security or a basket of income producing assets, including derivatives,
                                                    convertible securities and income trust units.
                  “investment banking” or           Includes but is not limited to:
                  “investment banking               (i) acting as an underwriter in an offering of securities for an issuer,
                  service”                          (ii) acting as a financial adviser in a merger or acquisition, or
                                                    (iii) providing venture capital, lines of credit or serving as a placement agent
                                                          for an issuer.

3607. Policies and procedures and minimum disclosure
         (1)     A Dealer Member’s policies and procedures must specifically address:
                 (i)     the conduct of analysts,
                 (ii)    the publishing of research reports, and
                 (iii)   the making of recommendations by analysts.
         (2)     A Dealer Member must designate one or more Supervisors to be responsible for reviewing and
                 approving research reports.




Series 3000 | Business Conduct and Client Accounts Rules                                                                      Rule 3600
                                                              Investment Dealer and Partially Consolidated Rules

3608. Research report disclosure of potential conflicts of interest
         (1)     A research report prepared by the Dealer Member must disclose any matter which might
                 reasonably indicate an existing or potential conflict of interest for the Dealer Member or the
                 analyst, which includes, but is not limited to, the matters set out in subsection 3608(2).
         (2)     A research report prepared by the Dealer Member must disclose:
                 (i)     if the Dealer Member or its affiliates has beneficial ownership of the equity securities of the
                         subject issuer that amounts to one percent or more of any class of such securities:
                         (a)     as of the end of the month prior to the issuance date of the research report, or
                         (b)     as of the end of the second most recent month if the report issuance date is less than
                                 10 days after the end of the prior month,
                 (ii)    if:
                         (a)     the analyst,
                         (b)     an associate of the analyst, or
                         (c)     any person directly involved in the preparation of the report,
                         holds or is short any of the issuer’s securities directly or indirectly,
                 (iii)   any services provided by any partner, Director or officer of the Dealer Member or analyst
                         involved in the preparation of a report, other than services provided in the normal course
                         investment advisory or trade execution services to the issuer for remuneration, during the
                         12 months immediately preceding the date a research report or recommendation was
                         issued,
                 (iv)    any investment banking services provided by the Dealer Member to the issuer for
                         remuneration during the 12 months immediately preceding the date a research report or
                         recommendation was issued,
                 (v)     the name of any partner, Director, officer, employee or agent of the Dealer Member who is
                         a partner, director, officer or employee of the issuer, or who serves in an equivalent
                         advisory capacity to the issuer, and
                 (vi)    if it is making a market in any equity security or equity related security of the subject issuer.
3609. Additional disclosures
         (1)     A research report must disclose or indicate where the following information is otherwise
                 available:
                 (i)     the Dealer Member’s system for rating investment opportunities and how each
                         recommendation fits within the system, and
                 (ii)    the Dealer Member’s policies and procedures that specifically address the dissemination of
                         its research reports.
         (2)     A Dealer Member must, on a quarterly basis, disclose the percentage of its recommendations
                 that fall into each category of its recommendation system.
3610. Quality of disclosures in a research report
         (1)     A Dealer Member must ensure that the research report disclosures required in sections 3608 and
                 3609 are made in a clear, meaningful, comprehensive and prominent manner.

Series 3000 | Business Conduct and Client Accounts Rules                                                          Rule 3600
                                                             Investment Dealer and Partially Consolidated Rules

         (2)     The Dealer Member must not use standard disclosure statements when it is more appropriate to
                 use specific information and customized disclosures in order to comply with the requirements set
                 out in section 3608 or 3609.
3611. Independent third party research report
         (1)     The disclosures required by sections 3608 and 3609 are applicable to research reports prepared
                 by an independent third party that is distributed by a Dealer Member to its clients under the
                 independent third party’s name.
         (2)     The disclosures in sections 3608 and 3609 are not required in the following circumstances:
                 (i)      in the case of independent third party research reports that are issued by members of the
                          Financial Industry Regulatory Authority or persons governed by other regulators approved
                          by the Corporation, or
                 (ii)     when a Dealer Member is only giving clients access to independent third party research
                          report, or supplying an independent third party research report at the request of a client,
                 and
                 (iii)   the Dealer Member discloses that the independent third party research report was not
                         prepared in accordance with Canadian disclosure requirements relating to research reports.
3612. Directing the reader to disclosures
         (1)     When a Dealer Member distributes a research report:
                 (i)     covering six or more issuers, the report may direct the reader to where the disclosures
                         required under sections 3608, 3609 and 3616 may be found, or
                 (ii)    electronically, the report may direct the reader to where the disclosures required under
                         sections 3608, 3609 and 3616 may be accessed by electronic means, such as through the
                         use of a hyperlink.
3613. Visiting an issuer
         (1)     A Dealer Member must disclose in its research reports:
                 (i)      whether, and to what extent, an analyst has visited the issuer’s material operations, and
                 (ii)     if the issuer has paid or reimbursed any of the analyst’s travel expenses with respect to the
                          visit.
3614. Relationship with the issuer
         (1)     A Dealer Member must not issue a research report prepared by an analyst on any issuer for which
                 the analyst, an associate of the analyst or the designated Supervisor:
                 (i)     serves as an officer, director or employee of the issuer, or
                 (ii)    serves in any advisory capacity to the issuer.
3615. Notice to discontinue coverage
         (1)     A Dealer Member must issue notice of its intention to suspend or discontinue coverage of an
                 issuer, to the same audience who received the coverage and in the same manner that the
                 coverage was distributed.



Series 3000 | Business Conduct and Client Accounts Rules                                                        Rule 3600
                                                               Investment Dealer and Partially Consolidated Rules

         (2)     Notice of discontinuance of coverage is not required if the sole reason for the suspension is that
                 the issuer has been placed on a Dealer Member’s restricted list.
3616. Setting price targets
         (1)     If a Dealer Member sets a price target in a research report, the Dealer Member must disclose, in
                 that research report, the valuation method used.
3617. Prohibited inducements
         (1)     A Dealer Member must not, as consideration or inducement for the receipt of business or
                 compensation from an issuer, directly or indirectly:
                 (i)      offer to issue favourable research report on the issuer,
                 (ii)     offer to set a favourable rating or price target on one or more of the issuer’s securities,
                 (iii)    offer to delay the changing of a rating or price target on one or more of the issuer’s
                          securities or the changing of any other research report element, including offering to delay
                          the issue date of the research report, or
                 (iv)     threaten to change a rating or a price target on one or more of the issuer’s securities or any
                          other element of a research report.
3618. Public comments
         (1)     When giving an interview or otherwise making any public comment about the merits of an issuer
                 or its securities, an employee or Approved Person of a Dealer Member must disclose whether or
                 not the Dealer Member has issued a relevant research report.
3619. Policies and procedures on trading
         (1)     A Dealer Member who issues or distributes research reports must have policies and procedures
                 that specifically address detecting and restricting any trading in equity securities or equity related
                 securities of a subject issuer that is done with knowledge of or in anticipation of:
                  (i)     the issuance of a research report,
                  (ii) a new recommendation, or
                  (iii)   a change in a recommendation,
                  related to the subject security that could reasonably be expected to have an effect on the price of
                  the subject securities.
         (2)     An individual directly involved in the preparation or approval of a research report must not trade
                 in equity securities or equity related securities of the subject issuer for a period beginning 30 days
                 prior to and ending five days after the issuance of the research report.
         (3)     Notwithstanding subsection 3619(2), an individual may trade with the prior written approval of a
                 designated Executive of the Dealer Member.
         (4)     Approval under subsection 3619(3) may not be granted for trades that are contrary to the
                 analyst’s current recommendation, unless special circumstances exist.




Series 3000 | Business Conduct and Client Accounts Rules                                                          Rule 3600
                                                              Investment Dealer and Partially Consolidated Rules

3620. Prohibition on investment banking compensation
         (1)     A research report must disclose if the analyst responsible for the report received compensation
                 within the prior 12 months that was based upon the Dealer Member’s investment banking
                 revenues.
         (2)     A Dealer Member must not pay any bonus, salary or other compensation to an analyst that is
                 directly based upon a specific investment banking transaction.
3621. Relationship with investment banking
         (1)     A Dealer Member’s policies and procedures must specifically address preventing
                 recommendations in research reports from being influenced by the investment banking
                 department or the issuer.
         (2)     The policies and procedures must specifically address, at a minimum:
                 (i)     prohibiting the approval of research reports by the investment banking department,
                 (ii)    limiting the investment banking department’s involvement in the production of research
                         reports solely to the correction of factual errors,
                 (iii)   prohibiting and preventing the investment banking department from receiving advance
                         notice of new ratings or rating changes on covered issuers, and
                 (iv)    establishing systems to control and record the flow of information between analysts and
                         investment banking department staff, regarding issuers that are the subject of current or
                         prospective research reports.
3622. Quiet periods
         (1)     A Dealer Member must not issue a research report on equity securities of a subject issuer for
                 which the Dealer Member has acted as manager or co-manager:
                 (i)     for 10 days after the date of the offering of an initial public offering of equity securities of
                         the subject issuer,
                 (ii)    for three days after the date of the offering of a secondary offering of equity securities of
                         the subject issuer.
         (2)     Subsection 3622(1) does not prevent a Dealer Member from issuing a research report on the
                 effects of significant news about or a significant event affecting the issuer within the applicable
                 10 day or three day period.
         (3)     Subsection 3622(1) does not apply where the subject securities are exempted from restrictions
                 under provisions relating to market stabilization set out in Corporation requirements and
                 securities laws.
3623. Outside activities
         (1)     A Dealer Member must pre-approve an analyst’s outside activities.




Series 3000 | Business Conduct and Client Accounts Rules                                                           Rule 3600
                                                            Investment Dealer and Partially Consolidated Rules

3624. – 3639. Reserved.

PART C – MISLEADING COMMUNICATIONS
3640. Misleading communications
         (1)      An Approved Person must not hold themselves out, and a Dealer Member must not hold itself or
                  its Approved Persons out, including through the use of a trade name, in a manner that could
                  reasonably be expected to deceive or mislead any person or company as to any of the following
                  matters:
                 (i)     the proficiency, experience, qualifications or category of registration or approval of the
                         Approved Person,
                 (ii)    the nature of the person’s relationship, or potential relationship, with the Dealer Member or
                         the Approved Person, or
                 (iii)   the products or services provided, or to be provided, by the Dealer Member or the Approved
                         Person.
          (2)     For greater certainty, and without limiting subsection 3640(1), an Approved Person who interacts
                  with clients must not use any of the following:
                 (i)     if based partly or entirely on that Approved Person’s sales activity or revenue generation, a
                         title, designation, award, or recognition,
                 (ii)    a corporate officer title, unless their Dealer Member has appointed that Approved Person to
                         that corporate office pursuant to applicable corporate law, or
                 (iii)   if the Approved Person’s Dealer Member has not approved the use by that Approved Person
                         of a title or designation, that title or designation.
3641. – 3699. Reserved.




Series 3000 | Business Conduct and Client Accounts Rules                                                        Rule 3600
                                                            Investment Dealer and Partially Consolidated Rules

RULE 3700 | REPORTING AND HANDLING OF COMPLAINTS, INTERNAL INVESTIGATIONS AND OTHER
            REPORTABLE MATTERS

3701. Introduction
         (1)     A Dealer Member must report complaints, internal investigations and other matters to the
                 Corporation as required in Rule 3700.
         (2)     A Dealer Member must investigate allegations of misconduct as required in Rule 3700.
         (3)     A Dealer Member must handle all client complaints as required in Rule 3700.
         (4)     Rule 3700 is divided into the following parts:
                  Part A – Reporting requirements
                             [sections 3702 through 3704]
                  Part B – Internal investigations and internal discipline
                             [sections 3706 through 3708]
                  Part C – Settlement agreements
                             [sections 3710 and 3711]
                  Part D – Client complaints – Institutional Clients
                             [section 3715]
                  Part E – Client complaints – Retail Clients
                             [sections 3720 through 3728]
                  Part F – Legal actions
                             [section 3780]
                  Part G – Record retention requirements
                             [sections 3785 and 3786]

PART A – REPORTING REQUIREMENTS
3702. Reporting by an Approved Person to the Dealer Member
         (1)     An Approved Person must report to the Dealer Member any of the following matters within two
                 business days:
                 (i)     if there is a change in the Approved Person’s registration information or Form 33-109F4,
                 (ii)    if the Approved Person has reason to believe that he or she has or may currently be
                         contravening any Corporation requirements, securities laws, or any applicable laws,
                 (iii)   if the Approved Person is the subject of a written client complaint, or
                 (iv)    if the Approved Person becomes aware of a client complaint, in writing or other form,
                         about another Approved Person involving allegations of theft, fraud, misappropriation of
                         funds, securities or other property, forgery, money laundering, market manipulation,
                         insider trading, misrepresentation, or unauthorized trading.
         (2)     An Approved Person must inform the Dealer Member of all pending legal actions against the
                 Approved Person.

Series 3000 | Business Conduct and Client Accounts Rules                                                       Rule 3700
                                                                 Investment Dealer and Partially Consolidated Rules

         (3)     A Dealer Member must designate an individual or department to receive, and maintain records
                 of, the reports required by subsection 3702(1).
3703. Reporting by a Dealer Member to the Corporation
         (1)     For purposes of this section 3703, a “cybersecurity incident” includes any act to gain
                 unauthorized access to, disrupt or misuse a Dealer Member’s information system, or information
                 stored on such information system, that has resulted in, or has a reasonable likelihood of
                 resulting in:
                 (i)     substantial harm to any person,
                 (ii)    a material impact on any part of the normal operations of the Dealer Member,
                 (iii)   invoking the Dealer Member’s business continuity plan or disaster recovery plan, or
                 (iv)    the Dealer Member being required under any applicable laws to provide notice to any
                         government body, securities regulatory authority or other self-regulatory organization.
         (2)     A Dealer Member must report to the Corporation any of the following matters, within the time
                 period and using the method prescribed by the Corporation:
                 (i)     all client complaints, against the Dealer Member or any current or former Approved Person,
                         except service complaints. For the purpose of clause 3703(2)(i), a service complaint by a
                         client is one that is related to service issues and is not the subject of any domestic or
                         foreign securities laws,
                 (ii)    whenever an internal investigation is commenced by the Dealer Member in accordance
                         with section 3706,
                 (iii)   the results of the internal investigation under clause 3703(2)(ii),
                 (iv)    any time the Dealer Member, or a current or former Approved Person is subject to one of
                         the following in any jurisdiction inside or outside of Canada, while in the employ of the
                         Dealer Member or concerning matters that occurred while in the employ of the Dealer
                         Member:
                         (a)     charged with, convicted of, plead guilty or no contest to, any criminal offence,
                         (b)     named as a defendant or respondent in, or is the subject of, any proceeding or
                                 disciplinary action alleging contravention of any securities laws,
                         (c)     named as a defendant or respondent in, or is the subject of any proceeding or
                                 disciplinary action alleging contravention of the requirements or policies of any
                                 regulatory or self-regulatory organization, professional licensing or registration body,
                         (d)     denial of registration or license by any regulatory or self-regulatory organization,
                                 professional licensing or registration body, or
                         (e)     subject to a civil claim or arbitration notice involving any of the following:
                                  (I)     any matters related to securities, derivatives or precious metals bullion,
                                  (II)    any matter related to handling of client accounts or dealings with clients, or
                                  (III)   any matter that is the subject of any legislation, rules, regulations, or policies
                                          concerning securities, derivatives or precious metals bullion or financial services
                                          of any securities, derivatives or financial services regulatory or self-regulatory
                                          organization in any jurisdiction,

Series 3000 | Business Conduct and Client Accounts Rules                                                               Rule 3700
                                                                 Investment Dealer and Partially Consolidated Rules

                 (v)     the resolution of any matters set out in clause 3703(2)(iv),
                 (vi)    any internal disciplinary action that is taken by a Dealer Member against an Approved
                         Person as a result of:
                         (a)     a client complaint within the meaning of clause 3703(2)(i),
                         (b)     a securities, derivatives or precious metals bullion related civil claim or arbitration
                                 notice,
                         (c)     an internal investigation,
                         (d)     a Dealer Member initiated disciplinary action imposing suspension, termination,
                                 demotion, or trading restrictions on the Approved Person, or
                         (e)     a Dealer Member initiated disciplinary action not involving any of the matters listed in
                                 sub-clauses 3703(1)(vi)(a) through 3703(1)(vi)(c), which results in a monetary penalty:
                                 (I)      over $5,000 for a single occurrence,
                                 (II)     over $15,000 in total in a calendar year, or
                                 (III)    imposed three times or more in a calendar year, and
                 (vii) any cybersecurity incident, in writing,
                         (a)     within three calendar days from discovering a cybersecurity incident, and must
                                 include the following information:
                                 (I)      a description of the cybersecurity incident,
                                 (II)     the date on which or time period during which the cybersecurity incident
                                          occurred and the date it was discovered by the Dealer Member,
                                 (III)    a preliminary assessment of the cybersecurity incident, including the risk of
                                          harm to any person and/or impact on the operations of the Dealer Member,
                                 (IV)     a description of immediate incident response steps the Dealer Member has
                                          taken to mitigate the risk of harm to persons and impact on its operations, and
                                 (V)      the name of and contact information for an individual who can answer, on
                                          behalf of the Dealer Member, any of the Corporation’s follow-up questions
                                          about the cybersecurity incident,
                         (b)     within 30 calendar days, unless otherwise agreed by the Corporation, from
                                 discovering a cybersecurity incident, and must include the following information:
                                  (I)     a description of the cause of the cybersecurity incident,
                                  (II)    an assessment of the scope of the cybersecurity incident, including the number
                                          of persons harmed and the impact on the operations of the Dealer Member,
                                  (III)   details of the steps the Dealer Member took to mitigate the risk of harm to
                                          persons and impact on its operations,
                                  (IV) details of the steps the Dealer Member took to remediate any harm to any
                                       persons, and
                                  (V)     actions the Dealer Member has or will take to improve its cybersecurity incident
                                          preparedness.




Series 3000 | Business Conduct and Client Accounts Rules                                                            Rule 3700
                                                             Investment Dealer and Partially Consolidated Rules

3704. Failure to report
         (1)     Failure to report, as required by sections 3702 and 3703, may result in the Corporation imposing
                 an administrative fee, or other penalties that are permitted under Corporation requirements,
                 against the Dealer Member or Approved Person.
3705. Reserved.

PART B – INTERNAL INVESTIGATIONS AND INTERNAL DISCIPLINE
3706. Requirement to commence an internal investigation
         (1)     A Dealer Member must conduct an internal investigation if it appears that the Dealer Member or
                 a current or former Approved Person while employed by the Dealer Member engaged in any of
                 the following types of activities in any jurisdiction inside or outside of Canada:
                 (i)      theft,
                 (ii)     fraud,
                 (iii)    misappropriation of funds, securities or other property,
                 (iv)    forgery,
                 (v)     money laundering,
                 (vi)     market manipulation,
                 (vii) insider trading,
                 (viii) misrepresentation, or
                 (ix)     unauthorized trading.
         (2)     For the purpose of clause 3706(1)(viii), a misrepresentation means:
                 (i)      an untrue statement of facts, or
                 (ii)     an omission to state a fact that is required to be stated or that is necessary to make a
                          statement not misleading in light of the circumstances in which it was made.
3707. Records of an internal investigation
         (1)     The Dealer Member must maintain records showing the:
                 (i)      cause of,
                 (ii)     steps taken, and
                 (iii)    results,
                 of each internal investigation in accordance with section 3803.
3708. Internal discipline
         (1)     A Dealer Member’s policies and procedures must establish procedures for any breach of
                 Corporation requirements or any securities laws to be subject to appropriate disciplinary
                 measures.




Series 3000 | Business Conduct and Client Accounts Rules                                                         Rule 3700
                                                            Investment Dealer and Partially Consolidated Rules

3709. Reserved.

PART C – SETTLEMENT AGREEMENTS
3710. Entering into settlement agreements
         (1)     An Approved Person must obtain the Dealer Member’s written consent before entering into any
                 settlement agreement with a client, regardless of the form of the settlement and regardless of
                 whether the settlement is the result of a client complaint or a finding by the Approved Person or
                 the Dealer Member.
         (2)     A Dealer Member must keep a record of the prior written consent in accordance with section
                 3803.
         (3)     Subsection 3710(1) does not apply to settlement agreements entered into by an employee or
                 Approved Person who is authorized by the Dealer Member to negotiate or enter into settlement
                 agreements in the normal course of his/her duties and does not arise out of the activities
                 involving the Approved Person.
3711. Release
         (1)     A release entered into between a Dealer Member and a client may not impose confidentiality or
                 similar restrictions aimed at preventing a client from initiating a complaint to the securities
                 regulatory authorities, SROs or other enforcement authorities, or continuing with any pending
                 complaint in progress, or participating in any further proceedings by such authorities.
3712. – 3714. Reserved.

PART D – CLIENT COMPLAINTS – INSTITUTIONAL CLIENTS
3715. Policies and procedures
         (1)     The Dealer Member’s policies and procedures must specifically address dealing effectively with
                 institutional client complaints received.
         (2)     The Dealer Member’s policies and procedures must specifically address the following:
                 (i)     the Dealer Member must acknowledge all written and verbal institutional client complaints,
                 (ii)    the Dealer Member must convey the results of its investigation, if any, of a complaint to the
                         institutional client in due course,
                 (iii)   the Dealer Member must ensure that the Approved Person and their Supervisor is aware of
                         all institutional client complaints filed against the Approved Person,
                 (iv)    the Dealer Member must ensure that all allegations of serious misconduct are reported to
                         an appropriate Executive, and
                 (v)     complaints are to be handled by a Supervisor and a copy must be filed with the compliance
                         department/function (or the equivalent) of the Dealer Member.
         (3)     If the Dealer Member determines that the number or severity of complaints is significant, or
                 when a Dealer Member detects frequent and repetitive complaints made with respect to the
                 same or similar matters which may on a cumulative basis indicate a serious problem, then the
                 Dealer Member must:


Series 3000 | Business Conduct and Client Accounts Rules                                                      Rule 3700
                                                            Investment Dealer and Partially Consolidated Rules

                 (i)     review its internal policies and procedures, and
                 (ii)    ensure recommendations to remedy the problem are submitted to the appropriate
                         management level.
3716. – 3719. Reserved.

PART E – CLIENT COMPLAINTS – RETAIL CLIENTS
3720. Retail client complaints
         (1)     A Dealer Member must establish and maintain policies to deal effectively with both:
                 (i)     retail client complaints alleging misconduct, and
                 (ii)    retail client complaints that do not allege misconduct.
         (2)     A Dealer Member must provide a written response to any retail client complaint that is submitted
                 in the form specified in section 3721.
3721. Application
         (1)     Part E of Rule 3700 applies to complaints submitted by a retail client or a person authorized to act
                 on behalf of a retail client in the following form:
                 (i)     a recorded expression of dissatisfaction with a Dealer Member or employee alleging
                         misconduct, or
                 (ii)    a verbal expression of dissatisfaction with the Dealer Member or employee alleging
                         misconduct where a preliminary investigation indicates that the allegation may have merit.
         (2)     For the purpose of subsections 3720(1) and 3721(1), alleged misconduct includes, but is not
                 limited to:
                 (i)     allegations of breach of confidentiality, theft, fraud, misappropriation or misuse of funds,
                         securities or other property, forgery, unsuitable investments, misrepresentation, or
                         unauthorized trading relating to the client’s account,
                 (ii)    other inappropriate financial dealings with clients, or
                 (iii)   engaging in Dealer Member related activities outside of the Dealer Member.
         (3)     Any matter which is the subject of a civil action or arbitration is not considered to be a complaint
                 for the purpose of section 3721.
3722. Handling client complaints
         (1)     Complaints must be handled by supervisory or compliance staff and a copy of the complaint must
                 be filed with the compliance department or function (or the equivalent) of the Dealer Member.
         (2)     The Dealer Member must appoint an individual to act as the designated complaints officer. The
                 individual must have the requisite experience and authority to oversee the complaint handling
                 process and to act as a liaison with the Corporation.
3723. Complaint policies and procedures
         (1)     A Dealer Member’s policies and procedures must specifically address dealing effectively, fairly
                 and expeditiously with complaints.
         (2)     A Dealer Member’s policies and procedures must specifically address:

Series 3000 | Business Conduct and Client Accounts Rules                                                        Rule 3700
                                                            Investment Dealer and Partially Consolidated Rules

                 (i)     procedures for a fair and thorough investigation of complaints,
                 (ii)    a process for assessing the merits of complaints,
                 (iii)   the process to be followed in determining what offer should be made to the client, where
                         the complaint is assessed to have merit,
                 (iv)    a description of remedial actions which may be appropriate to be taken within the firm,
                 (v)     a procedure that will ensure that complaints are not dismissed without proper
                         consideration of the facts of each case,
                 (vi)     a balanced approach to dealing with complaints that objectively considers the interests of
                          the complainant, the Dealer Member, including the employees, Approved Persons or other
                          relevant parties,
                 (vii) a process that ensures that the relevant employees, Approved Persons and their Supervisors
                       are made aware of all complaints filed by their clients,
                 (viii) procedures to inform an appropriate Executive of any serious misconduct, and
                 (ix)    procedures to monitor the general nature of the complaints.
         (3)     If a Dealer Member determines that the number or severity of complaints is significant, or when a
                 Dealer Member detects frequent and repetitive complaints made with respect to the same or
                 similar matters which may on a cumulative basis indicate a serious problem, the Dealer Member
                 must:
                 (i)     review its internal procedures and practices, and
                 (ii)    ensure recommendations to remedy the problem are submitted to the appropriate
                         management level.
3724. Client access
         (1)     At the time of account opening, a Dealer Member must provide each new client with:
                 (i)     a written summary of the Dealer Member’s complaint handling procedures, which is clear
                         and can be easily understood by the client, and
                 (ii)    a copy of the complaint handling process brochure, approved by the Corporation.
         (2)     A Dealer Member must make available to its clients, on an ongoing basis, a written summary of
                 the Dealer Member’s complaint handling procedures which may be made available either on the
                 Dealer Member’s website or by other means.
3725. Complaint acknowledgement letter
         (1)     The Dealer Member must send an acknowledgement letter to the complainant within five
                 business days of receipt of a complaint.
         (2)     The acknowledgement letter in subsection 3725(1) must include the following:
                 (i)     the name, job title and full contact information of the individual at the Dealer Member
                         handling the complaint,
                 (ii)    a statement indicating that the client should contact the individual at the Dealer Member
                         handling the complaint if he/she would like to inquire about the status of the complaint or
                         provide the Dealer Member with any additional information,



Series 3000 | Business Conduct and Client Accounts Rules                                                      Rule 3700
                                                                Investment Dealer and Partially Consolidated Rules

                 (iii)   an explanation of the Dealer Member’s internal complaint handling process, including but
                         not limited to the role of the designated complaints officer,
                 (iv)     a reference to an attached copy of the Corporation approved complaint handling process
                          brochure and a reference to the statutes of limitations contained in the document,
                 (v)      the 90 days time line to provide a substantive response to complainants, and
                 (vi)      a statement informing the client that the Dealer Member may request additional
                          information, from time to time, to investigate the complaint.
3726. Response to client complaints
         (1)     The Dealer Member must send a substantive response letter to each complainant.
         (2)     The substantive response letter must be accompanied by a copy of the complaint handling
                 process brochure approved by the Corporation.
         (3)     The substantive response letter must be presented in a manner that is fair, clear and not
                 misleading to the client, and must include the following information:
                 (i)      a summary of the complaint,
                 (ii)     the result of the Dealer Member’s investigation,
                 (iii)    the Dealer Member’s final decision on the complaint, including an explanation, and
                 (iv)     a statement describing to the client the options available if the client is not satisfied with
                          the Dealer Member’s response, including the availability of:
                         (a)     arbitration,
                         (b)     litigation/civil action,
                         (c)     submitting a complaint to the Corporation,
                         (d)     the ombudsman service, if a request is made within the period required by the
                                 ombudsman,
                         (e)     an internal ombudsman service offered by an affiliate of the Dealer Member, if any,
                                 with an explanation that:
                                 (I)      the use of the internal ombudsman process is voluntary, and
                                 (II)     the estimated length of time the process is expected to take based on historical
                                          data, and
                         (f)     any other applicable options.
         (4)     A Dealer Member must respond to each client complaint as soon as possible and not later than 90
                 days from the date of receipt of the complaint subject to the following:
                 (i)      the 90 days time line must include all internal processes of the Dealer Member that are
                          made available to the client, other than the internal ombudsman process offered by an
                          affiliate of the Dealer Member,
                 (ii)     the Dealer Member must inform the client if the Dealer Member is unable to provide the
                          client with a final response within the 90 days time line and must include the reasons for
                          the delay and the new estimated time of completion, and
                 (iii)   the Dealer Member must inform the Corporation if the Dealer Member is unable to meet
                         the 90 days time line and must provide reasons for the delay.


Series 3000 | Business Conduct and Client Accounts Rules                                                           Rule 3700
                                                            Investment Dealer and Partially Consolidated Rules

3727. Duty to assist in client complaint resolution
         (1)     If an Approved Person moves to a different Dealer Member after a complaint has been made
                 against the Approved Person, the Approved Person must continue to co-operate with the Dealer
                 Member where they were employed or acted as an agent until the complaint has been resolved.
         (2)     Dealer Members must co-operate with each other if events relating to a complaint took place at
                 more than one Dealer Member or if the Approved Person is an employee or agent of another
                 Dealer Member that is not involved in the events relating to the complaint.
3728. Client complaint file
         (1)     A Dealer Member must retain the following information in accordance with section 3786 for each
                 client complaint:
                 (i)     the complainant’s name,
                 (ii)    the date of the complaint,
                 (iii)   the nature of the complaint,
                 (iv)    the name of the individual who is subject of the complaint,
                 (v)     the securities, derivatives, other property or services which are the subject of the
                         complaint,
                 (vi)    the materials reviewed in the investigation,
                 (vii) the name, title and date individuals were interviewed for the investigation, and
                 (viii) the date and conclusion of the decision rendered in connection with the complaint.
3729. – 3779. Reserved.

PART F – LEGAL ACTIONS
3780. Reporting legal actions
         (1)     All legal actions against the Dealer Member must be reported to an appropriate Executive of the
                 Dealer Member.
3781. – 3784. Reserved.

PART G – RECORD RETENTION REQUIREMENTS
3785. Matters reported to the Corporation
         (1)     A Dealer Member must maintain, and make available to the Corporation upon request, copies of
                 all documents associated with matters reported to the Corporation under section 3703 for a
                 minimum of seven years from the date of resolution of the matter.
3786. Client complaints
         (1)     A Dealer Member must keep an up-to-date record of all client complaints and associated
                 documentation relating to the conduct, business and affairs of the Dealer Member, or an
                 employee of the Dealer Member, in a central and readily accessible place for a period of two
                 years from the date of receipt of a client complaint.



Series 3000 | Business Conduct and Client Accounts Rules                                                        Rule 3700
                                                           Investment Dealer and Partially Consolidated Rules

         (2)     For each client complaint file, a Dealer Member must maintain a copy for seven years in a
                 location that is retrievable within a reasonable period of time.
3787. – 3799. Reserved.




Series 3000 | Business Conduct and Client Accounts Rules                                                     Rule 3700
                                                                      Investment Dealer and Partially Consolidated Rules

RULE 3800 | DEALER MEMBER RECORDS AND CLIENT COMMUNICATIONS

3801. Introduction
         (1)     Maintaining complete and accurate records is a fundamental responsibility of a Dealer Member. A
                 Dealer Member’s records provide an audit trail to support the Dealer Member’s supervision of its
                 business and are necessary to prepare regulatory financial reports and to report accurately
                 to clients.
3802. Definitions
         (1)     The following terms have the meaning set out below when used in Rule 3800:
                  “book cost”                              In the case of:
                                                           (i) a long security position, the total amount paid for the security,
                                                               including any transaction charges related to the purchase, adjusted
                                                               for reinvested distributions, returns of capital and corporate actions,
                                                               or
                                                           (ii) a short security position, the total amount received for the security,
                                                                net of any transaction charges related to the sale, adjusted for any
                                                                distributions (other than dividends), returns of capital and corporate
                                                                actions.
                  “connected issuer”                       The same meaning as ascribed to it in securities laws
                  “cost”                                   For each security position in the account and each security position
                                                           subject to the additional reporting obligation under section 3809:
                                                           (i) on or after December 31, 2015:
                                                               (a) either book cost or original cost, determined as at the end of
                                                                   the applicable period, provided that only one cost calculation
                                                                   methodology, either book cost or original cost, is used for all
                                                                   positions, or
                                                               (b) in the case of security positions that are transferred in, either:
                                                                    (I) the amount determined in sub-clause (i)(a) of this
                                                                        definition, or
                                                                    (II) the market value of the security position as at the date of
                                                                         transfer, provided that the following notification or a
                                                                         notification that is substantially similar identifies each
                                                                         security position where market value has been used is
                                                                         included in the statement or report:
                                                                             “Market value information has been used to
                                                                             estimate part or all of the [book cost/original
                                                                             cost] of this security position.”
                                                           (ii) before December 31, 2015:
                                                               (a) either book cost or original cost, determined as at the end of
                                                                   the applicable period, provided that only one cost calculation


Series 3000 | Business Conduct and Client Accounts Rules                                                                       Rule 3800
                                                                     Investment Dealer and Partially Consolidated Rules

                                                                    methodology, either book cost or original cost, is used for all
                                                                    positions, or
                                                               (b) the market value of the security position as at December 31,
                                                                   2015 or an earlier date, provided that the following notification
                                                                   or a notification that is substantially similar identifies each
                                                                   security position where market value has been used is included
                                                                   in the statement or report:
                                                                        “Market value information as at [December 31, 2015
                                                                         or earlier date] has been used to estimate part or all
                                                                         of the [book cost/original cost] of this security
                                                                         position.”
                                                           (iii) where the Dealer Member reasonably believes it cannot determine
                                                                 the cost in accordance with clause (i) and sub-clause (ii)(b) of this
                                                                 definition, the Dealer must include the following notification or a
                                                                 notification that is substantially similar: “The [book cost/original
                                                                 cost] of this security position cannot be determined.”
                  “direct investment fund                  The amount charged to a client if the client buys, holds, sells or switches
                  charge”                                  securities of an investment fund, including any taxes paid on that
                                                           amount, other than, for greater certainty, an amount included in the
                                                           investment fund’s fund expenses.
                  “fund expenses per security for The fund expenses per security of the applicable class or series of
                  the day”                        securities of the investment fund for the day that the client owned those
                                                  securities, expressed in dollars, and determined by using the following
                                                  formula:
                                                           AxB=C
                                                           where:
                                                               A = the fund expense ratio for the day of the applicable class or
                                                               series of securities of the investment fund;
                                                               B = the market value of a security for the day of the applicable class
                                                               or series of securities of the investment fund;
                                                               C = the fund expenses per security for the day in dollars for the
                                                               investment fund class or series of securities;
                                                           and where:
                                                           (i) reasonable necessary adjustments to A or B are made to accurately
                                                               determine C, or
                                                           (ii) reasonable approximations of any or all of A, B and C are used,
                                                                subject to subsections 3811(5) and 3811(6).
                  “fund expense ratio”                     The sum of an investment fund’s management expense ratio and trading
                                                           expense ratio, expressed as a percentage.
                  “management expense ratio”               The same meaning as in section 1.1 of National Instrument 81-106
                                                           Investment Fund Continuous Disclosure.

Series 3000 | Business Conduct and Client Accounts Rules                                                                        Rule 3800
                                                                      Investment Dealer and Partially Consolidated Rules

                  “newly-established investment            An investment fund that:
                  fund”                                    (i) has yet to file the required management report of fund
                                                               performance, as defined in section 1.1 of National Instrument 81-
                                                               106 Investment Fund Continuous Disclosure, or
                                                           (ii) is established less than 12 months before the end of the period
                                                                covered by the fee/charges report the Dealer Member is required to
                                                                deliver pursuant to section 3811.
                  “operating charge”                       Any amount charged to a client by a Dealer Member in respect of the
                                                           operation, transfer or termination of a client’s account and includes any
                                                           taxes paid on that amount.
                  “original cost”                          In the case of:
                                                           (i) a long security position, the total amount paid for the security,
                                                               including any transaction charges related to the purchase, or
                                                           (ii) a short security position, the total amount received for the security,
                                                                net of any transaction charges related to the sale.
                  “outside holdings”                       Client positions that are neither held at or under the control of the
                                                           Dealer Member:
                                                           (i) in securities issued by a scholarship plan, a mutual fund or an
                                                               investment fund that is a labour sponsored investment fund
                                                               corporation, or labour sponsored venture capital corporation, under
                                                               applicable laws and the Dealer Member is the dealer of record for
                                                               the client on the records of the issuer of the security or the records
                                                               of the issuer’s investment fund manager, or
                                                           (ii) in any other security, derivative or precious metals bullion positions
                                                                on which the Dealer Member receives continuing compensation
                                                                payments related to the client’s ownership of the position from the
                                                                issuer of the position, the investment fund manager of the issuer or
                                                                any other party.
                  “ position cost”                         For each security position in the account and each security position
                                                           subject to the additional reporting obligation under section 3809:
                                                           (i) on or after December 31, 2015:
                                                               (a) either book cost or original cost, determined as at the end of
                                                                   the applicable period, provided that only one cost calculation
                                                                   methodology, either book cost or original cost, is used for all
                                                                   positions, or
                                                               (b) in the case of security positions that are transferred in, either:
                                                                    (I) the amount determined in sub-clause (i)(a) of this
                                                                        definition, or
                                                                    (II) the market value of the security position as at the date of
                                                                         transfer, provided that the following notification or a
                                                                         notification that is substantially similar identifies each

Series 3000 | Business Conduct and Client Accounts Rules                                                                       Rule 3800
                                                                      Investment Dealer and Partially Consolidated Rules

                                                                         security position where market value has been used is
                                                                         included in the statement or report:
                                                                              “Market value information has been used to
                                                                              estimate part or all of the [book cost/original
                                                                              cost] of this security position.”
                                                           (ii) before December 31, 2015:
                                                               (a) either book cost or original cost, determined as at the end of
                                                                   the applicable period, provided that only one cost calculation
                                                                   methodology, either book cost or original cost, is used for all
                                                                   positions, or
                                                               (b) the market value of the security position as at December 31,
                                                                   2015 or an earlier date, provided that the following notification
                                                                   or a notification that is substantially similar identifies each
                                                                   security position where market value has been used is included
                                                                   in the statement or report:
                                                                         “Market value information as at [December 31, 2015
                                                                          or earlier date] has been used to estimate part or all
                                                                          of the [book cost/original cost] of this security
                                                                          position.”
                                                           (iii) where the Dealer Member reasonably believes it cannot determine
                                                                 the position cost in accordance with clause (i) and sub-clause (ii)(b)
                                                                 of this definition, the Dealer must include the following notification
                                                                 or a notification that is substantially similar:
                                                                    “The [book cost/original cost] of this security position cannot be
                                                                    determined.”
                  “related issuer”                         The same meaning as ascribed to it in securities laws.
                  “total amount of fund                    The amount, expressed in dollars, determined by adding together the
                  expenses”                                daily fund expenses for each class or series of securities of each
                                                           investment fund owned by the client for each day that the client owned
                                                           it during the reporting period, using the following formula to calculate
                                                           the daily fund expenses:
                                                           AxB=C
                                                           where:
                                                               A = the fund expenses per security for the day of the applicable class
                                                               or series of securities of the investment fund;
                                                               B = the number of the applicable class or series of securities of the
                                                               investment fund owned by the client for that day;
                                                               C = the daily fund expenses in dollars for a class or series of
                                                               securities of the investment fund.
                                                           A reasonable approximation of the total amount of fund expenses may
                                                           be used, subject to subsections 3811(5) and 3811(6).


Series 3000 | Business Conduct and Client Accounts Rules                                                                         Rule 3800
                                                                     Investment Dealer and Partially Consolidated Rules

                  “total percentage return”                The cumulative realized and unrealized capital gains and losses of an
                                                           investment, plus income from the investment, over a specified period of
                                                           time, expressed as a percentage.
                  “trading expense ratio”                  The ratio, expressed as a percentage, of the total commissions and other
                                                           portfolio transaction costs incurred by an investment fund to its average
                                                           net asset value, calculated in accordance with paragraph 12 of item 3 of
                                                           Part B of Form 81-106F1 Contents of Annual and Interim Management
                                                           Report of Fund Performance of National Instrument 81-106 Investment
                                                           Fund Continuous Disclosure.
                  “trailing commission”                    Any payment related to a client’s ownership of a security that is part of a
                                                           continuing series of payments to a Dealer Member by any party.
                  “transaction charge”                     Any amount charged to a client by a Dealer Member in respect of a
                                                           purchase or sale of a security and includes any taxes paid on that
                                                           amount.


3803. General requirements for record retention periods
         (1)     A Dealer Member must retain copies of all records in a safe location required under Corporation
                 requirements, in durable and accessible form, for a minimum of seven years from the date the
                 record is created unless Corporation requirements or securities laws relating to the specific type
                 of record require a different retention period.
3804. General requirements to maintain records
         (1)     A Dealer Member must maintain current records that:
                 (i)      properly record its business activities, financial position, financial operating results and
                          client transactions, and
                 (ii)     demonstrate the Dealer Member’s compliance with securities laws and Corporation
                          requirements.
         (2)     The records required under subsection 3804(1) include, but are not limited to, records that do the
                 following:
                 (i)     permit timely creation and audit of financial statements and other financial information
                         required to be filed or delivered to the Corporation or the applicable securities regulatory
                         authority,
                 (ii)    permit determination of the Dealer Member’s capital position,
                 (iii)   demonstrate compliance with the Dealer Member’s capital and insurance requirements,
                 (iv)    demonstrate compliance with internal control procedures,
                 (v)      demonstrate compliance with the Dealer Member’s policies and procedures,
                 (vi)     permit the identification and segregation of client cash, securities, precious metals bullion
                          and other property,
                 (vii) identify all transactions conducted on behalf of the Dealer Member and each of its clients,
                       including the parties to the transaction and the terms of the purchase or sale,
                 (viii) provide an audit trail for:

Series 3000 | Business Conduct and Client Accounts Rules                                                                       Rule 3800
                                                              Investment Dealer and Partially Consolidated Rules

                           (a)   client instructions, orders and transactions, and
                           (b)   each trade transmitted or transaction executed for a client or by the Dealer Member
                                 on its own behalf,
                 (ix)      permit the generation of account activity reports for clients,
                 (x)       provide securities, derivatives and precious metals bullion pricing as may be required by
                           securities laws,
                 (xi)      document the opening of client accounts, including any agreements with clients and
                           evidence that account related documents required by Corporation requirements have been
                           provided to clients,
                 (xii) demonstrate compliance with know-your-client, account appropriateness, product due
                       diligence, know-your-product and suitability determination requirements,
                 (xiii) demonstrate compliance with complaint handling requirements,
                 (xiv) document correspondence with clients,
                 (xv) document compliance, training, and supervision actions taken by the Dealer Member,
                 (xvi) demonstrate compliance with conflicts of interest requirements,
                 (xvii) document
                           (a)   the Dealer Member’s sales practices, compensation arrangements and incentive
                                 practices, and
                           (b)   other compensation arrangements and incentive practices from which the Dealer
                                 Member or its Approved Persons, or any affiliate or associate of that Dealer Member,
                                 benefit, and
                 (xviii)     demonstrate compliance with misleading communications requirements,
                 (xix)       demonstrate compliance with the conditions for temporary holds, and
                 (xx)        demonstrate determination undertaken to classify a client as a hedger and as an
                             institutional client.
         (3)     A Dealer Member must maintain appropriate internal controls to provide reasonable assurance
                 that its records:
                  (i)      are correct,
                 (ii)      provide clear and accurate information, and
                 (iii)     remain current.
         (4)     A Dealer Member must make its records available to the Corporation on request, in the manner
                 requested by the Corporation.
         (5)     A Dealer Member must provide the Corporation with statistical or other information with respect
                 to the Dealer Member’s business that the Corporation may request from time to time, acting
                 reasonably. Such information must be provided as soon as practicable following the Corporation’s
                 request.
3805. Trade blotters (records of original entry)
         (1)     A Dealer Member must maintain blotters or other records of original entry by itemizing daily, the
                 following:


Series 3000 | Business Conduct and Client Accounts Rules                                                         Rule 3800
                                                                Investment Dealer and Partially Consolidated Rules

                 (i)      all purchases and sales of securities and precious metals bullion,
                 (ii)     all receipts and deliveries of securities (including certificate numbers) and precious metals
                          bullion,
                 (iii)    all transactions in derivatives,
                 (iv)     all receipts and disbursements of cash, and
                 (v)      all other debits and credits.
         (2)     The blotters or records of original entry must contain, at a minimum, the following:
                 (i)      in the case of trades in securities and precious metals bullion:
                          (a)      the description, class and designation of securities and precious metals bullion,
                          (b)      the number, value or amount of securities and precious metals bullion and the unit
                                   and aggregate purchase or sale price (if any),
                          (c)      the name or other designation of the person from whom or to whom the securities
                                   and precious metals bullion were purchased or received or sold or delivered,
                          (d)      the trade dates, and
                          (e)      the applicable account in which each transaction was effected,
                 (ii)     in the case of transactions in futures contracts, forward contracts, contracts for difference
                          and similar derivatives:
                          (a)      the contract underlying interest,
                          (b)      the contract quantity bought or sold,
                          (c)      if applicable, the quantity of the underlying interest bought or sold,
                          (d)      if applicable, the contract delivery date,
                          (e)      the price at which the contract was entered into,
                          (f)      the transaction dates,
                          (g)      the applicable account in which each transaction was effected,
                          (h)      if applicable, the name of the derivatives marketplace,
                          (i)      if applicable, the name of the dealer, used by the Dealer Member as its agent to
                                   effect the transaction, and
                          (j)      if applicable, whether the transactions are opening or closing transactions (where
                                   required by the marketplace),
                 (iii)    in the case of transactions in options contracts, futures contract options and similar
                          derivatives:
                          (a)     the contract underlying interest,
                          (b)     the contract quantity bought or sold,
                          (c)     the contract type,
                          (d)      the contract premium,
                          (e)      the contract exercise or striking price,
                          (f)      the contract declaration date,
                          (g)      the transaction dates,
                          (h)      the applicable account in which each transaction was effected,
                          (i)      if applicable:

Series 3000 | Business Conduct and Client Accounts Rules                                                           Rule 3800
                                                                 Investment Dealer and Partially Consolidated Rules

                                  (I)      the futures contract that is the subject of the futures contract option,
                                  (II)     the delivery month and year of the futures contract that is the subject of the
                                           futures contract option,
                          (j)      if applicable, the name of the derivatives marketplace,
                          (k)      if applicable, the name of the dealer used by the Dealer Member as its agent to
                                   effect the
                         (l)     if applicable, whether the transactions are opening or closing transactions (where
                                 required by the marketplace).
3806. General ledger of accounts
         (1)     A Dealer Member must maintain a general ledger (or other records) with an itemized account
                 detail of all assets, liabilities, income, expense and capital accounts.
3807. Itemized client ledger accounts
         (1)     A Dealer Member must maintain ledger accounts (or other records) itemizing separately as to
                 each cash and margin account of every client, all purchases, sales, receipts, deliveries and other
                 transactions of securities, derivatives and precious metals bullion for such account and all other
                 debits and credits to such account.
         (2)     When a Dealer Member receives securities and property to margin, guarantee, or secure the
                 trades or transactions of a client’s account, the ledger must contain, at a minimum, the following:
                 (i)      a description of the securities, precious metals bullion or property received,
                 (ii)     the date when received,
                 (iii)    the identity of any deposit institution where such securities, precious metals bullion or
                          property are segregated,
                 (iv)     the dates of deposit and withdrawal from such institutions, and
                 (v)      the date of return of such securities, precious metals bullion or property to the client or
                          other disposition thereof, together with the facts and circumstances of such other
                          disposition.
         (3)     When a Dealer Member invests the money, proceeds or funds segregated for the benefit of its
                 clients, the ledger must contain, at a minimum, the following:
                 (i)      the date of the transaction,
                 (ii)     the identity of the person or company through or from whom such securities were
                          purchased,
                 (iii)    the amount invested,
                 (iv)     a description of the securities invested in,
                 (v)     the identity of the deposit institution, other dealer or dealer registered under any
                         securities laws where such securities are deposited,
                 (vi)    the date of liquidation or other disposition and the money received on such disposition,
                         and
                 (vii)    the identity of the person or company to or through whom such securities were disposed.


Series 3000 | Business Conduct and Client Accounts Rules                                                              Rule 3800
                                                                 Investment Dealer and Partially Consolidated Rules

3808. Client account statements
         (1)     A Dealer Member must make available daily account information, similar to the information
                 included in a statement as prescribed under subsection 3808(4), to each retail client who at the
                 end of the day has in their account:
                 (i)   an open futures contract, forward contract, contract for difference or similar derivative
                       position, or
                 (ii)  an unexpired and unexercised option contract, futures contract option or similar derivative
                       position.
         (2)     A Dealer Member must send a monthly statement to each client who:
                 (i)      requests to receive a client account statement on a monthly basis, or
                 (ii)     at the end of the month has in their account:
                          (a)      had a transaction during the month,
                          (b)      has experienced a cash or account position modification, other than dividend or
                                   interest payments,
                          (c)      an unexpired and unexercised option contract, futures contract option or similar
                                   derivative position, or
                          (d)      an open futures contract, forward contract, contract for difference or similar
                                   derivative position.
         (3)     A Dealer Member must send a quarterly statement to each client who, at the end of the quarter
                 has:
                  (i)     a debit or credit balance, or
                 (ii)     one or more securities, derivatives or precious metals bullion (including securities or
                          precious metals bullion held in safekeeping or in segregation), in their account.
         (4)     The statement must include all of the following information about the client’s account at the end
                 of the period for which the statement is made:
                 (i)      the opening cash balance in the account,
                 (ii)     all deposits, credits, withdrawals and debits made to the account,
                 (iii)    the closing cash balance in the account,
                 (iv)     the description and quantity of each security, derivative and precious metals bullion
                          position in the account,
                 (v)      for each security, derivative and precious metals bullion position in the account:
                          (a)     where the market value is determinable:
                                  (I)      the market value,
                                  (II)     the total market value, and
                                  (III)    if applicable, the notification required pursuant to either clause (i)(b) or clause
                                           (ii)(b) of the definition of market value in subsection 1201(2)
                          (b)     where the market value is not determinable, the notification required pursuant to
                                  either clause (ii)(b) or clause (ii)(c) of the definition of market value in subsection
                                  1201(2),

Series 3000 | Business Conduct and Client Accounts Rules                                                               Rule 3800
                                                                 Investment Dealer and Partially Consolidated Rules

                 (vi)    where the client is a retail client and the statement is a quarterly statement, the statement
                         must also include:
                         (a)     for each security, derivative and precious metals bullion position in the account:
                                 (I)      where the position cost is determinable, either the position cost or the total
                                          position cost, and
                                 (II)     where the position cost is not determinable, the notification required pursuant
                                          to clause (iii) of the definition of position cost in subsection 3802(1),
                         and
                         (b)     a notation setting out the definitions of the calculation methodologies used to
                                 calculate the individual position cost information included in the statement, provided
                                 that where the individual position cost information included in the statement is
                                 calculated using:
                                   (I)     the book cost calculation methodology, the language set out in the definition
                                           of book cost in subsection 3802(1) or language that is substantially similar
                                           must be used as the notation, and
                                   (II)    the original cost calculation methodology, the language set out in the
                                           definition of original cost in subsection 3802(1) or language that is
                                           substantially similar must be used as the notation,
                 (vii)    the total market value of all cash, security, derivative and precious metals bullion positions
                          in the account, and
                 (viii) where the client is a retail client and the statement is a quarterly statement, the total cost
                        of all cash, security, derivative and precious metals bullion positions in the account.
         (5)     In the case of clients with any security, derivative and precious metals bullion positions which
                 might be subject to a deferred sales charge if they are sold, a notation identifying each position
                 that might be subject to a deferred sales charge.
         (6)     In the case of clients with any open futures contracts, forward contracts, contracts for difference
                 or similar derivatives, the daily and monthly statements must contain, at a minimum, the
                 following:
                 (i)      the description and quantity of each open contract, and
                 (ii)     the price at which each open contract was entered into.
         (7)     In the case of clients with any unexpired and unexercised option contracts, futures contract
                 options or similar derivatives, the daily and monthly statements must contain, at a minimum, the
                 following:
                 (i)      the description and quantity of each unexpired and unexercised contract, and
                 (ii)     the exercise or striking price of each unexpired and unexercised contract.
         (8)     In the case where a Dealer Member has acted as an agent in connection with a liquidating
                 transaction in a futures contract or similar listed derivative, the monthly statement must contain,
                 at a minimum, the following:
                 (i)      the dates of the initial transaction and liquidating trade,

Series 3000 | Business Conduct and Client Accounts Rules                                                             Rule 3800
                                                              Investment Dealer and Partially Consolidated Rules

                 (ii)     the commodity and quantity bought and sold,
                 (iii)    the futures marketplace upon which the contract was traded,
                 (iv)     the delivery month and year,
                 (v)      the prices on the initial transaction and on the liquidating trade,
                 (vi)     the gross profit or loss on the transactions,
                 (vii)    the commission, and
                 (viii) the net profit or loss on the transactions.
         (9)     In the case of transactions involving:
                 (i)      securities of the Dealer Member, or
                 (ii)     securities of a related issuer of the Dealer Member, or
                 (iii)    securities of a connected issuer of the Dealer Member, or
                 (iv)     securities referenced in clauses 3808(9)(i) through 3808(9)(iii) that are in the course of a
                          distribution to the public, or
                 (v)      derivatives whose underlying interest is referenced in clauses 3808(9)(i) through
                          3808(9)(iv),
                 the monthly statement must indicate that the transactions involve securities of the Dealer
                 Member, a related issuer of the Dealer Member or a connected issuer of the Dealer Member or a
                 derivative whose underlying interest is a security of the Dealer Member, a related issuer of the
                 Dealer Member or a connected issuer of the Dealer Member, as the case may be.
         (10) If a Dealer Member does not deposit clients’ free credit balances in a trust bank account, the
              client statement must include the following notation:
                          "Any free credit balances (except for RRSP funds held in trust) represent funds payable on
                          demand which, although properly recorded in our books, are not segregated and may be
                          used in the conduct of our business."
         (11) In the case of derivatives transactions executed for an institutional client under a give-up
              agreement, the executing Dealer Member shall not be required to send a monthly statement,
              provided
                 (i)      the client, executing Dealer Member and Dealer Member responsible to clear and settle
                          the transaction are parties to the give-up agreement
                 (ii)     the clearing Dealer Member is responsible, under the give-up agreement, for sending a
                          monthly statement to the client, and
                 (iii)    the executing Dealer Member:
                          (a)     executes the transaction in accordance with the client’s instructions to give up such
                                  transaction to the clearing Dealer Member,
                          (b)     provides limited transaction execution service to the client under the give-up
                                  agreement and does not maintain client account documentation, or receive the
                                  client’s money, securities, margin or collateral, and


Series 3000 | Business Conduct and Client Accounts Rules                                                          Rule 3800
                                                                  Investment Dealer and Partially Consolidated Rules

                          (c)     provides the clearing Dealer Member a monthly invoice with details of the give-up
                                  transactions of the client and the clearing Dealer Member reconciles the transactions
                                  details with its own record.
3809. Report on client positions held outside of the Dealer Member
         (1)     A Dealer Member must send a quarterly report on outside holdings (report to be called “Report
                 on client positions held outside of the Dealer Member”) to each retail client who, at the end of
                 the quarter has one or more outside holdings.
         (2)     The report must include all of the following information about the client’s outside holdings at the
                 end of the period for which the report is made:
                 (i)      the name and quantity of each position,
                 (ii)     for each position:
                         where the market value is :
                          (a)     determinable:
                                  (I)      the market value,
                                  (II)     the total market value, and
                                  (III)    if applicable, the notification required pursuant to clause (i)(b) of the
                                           definition of market value in subsection 1201(2), and
                          (b)     not determinable, the notification required pursuant to clause (i)(c) of the definition
                                  of market value in subsection 1201(2),
                 (iii)    for each position:
                         where the position cost is :
                         (a)     determinable, either the position cost or the total position cost, and
                         (b)     not determinable, the notification required pursuant to clause (iii) of the definition of
                                 position cost in subsection 3802(1),
                 (iv)     a notation setting out the definitions of the calculation methodologies used to calculate
                          the individual position cost information included in the statement, provided that where the
                          individual position cost information included in the statement is calculated using:
                          (a)      the book cost calculation methodology, the language set out in the definition of
                                   book cost in subsection 3802(1) or language that is substantially similar must be
                                   used as the notation, and
                          (b)      the original cost calculation methodology, the language set out in the definition of
                                   original cost in subsection 3802(1) or language that is substantially similar must be
                                   used as the notation,
                 (v)      the total market value of all positions,
                 (vi)     the total position cost of all positions, and
                 (vii)    the name of the party that holds or controls each position and a description of the way it is
                          held.



Series 3000 | Business Conduct and Client Accounts Rules                                                               Rule 3800
                                                                 Investment Dealer and Partially Consolidated Rules

         (3)     In the case of clients with any outside holdings which might be subject to a deferred sales charge
                 if they are sold, the report must include a notation identifying each position that might be subject
                 to a deferred sales charge.
         (4)     The report must indicate:
                 (i)     that the client’s outside holdings are not covered by the Canadian Investor Protection Fund,
                         and
                 (ii)    whether the client’s outside holdings are covered under any other investor protection
                         fund approved or recognized by a Canadian securities regulatory authority and, if they are,
                         the name of the fund.
3810. Performance report
         (1)     A Dealer Member must send an annual performance report to each retail client who, at the end
                 of the 12-month period covered by the report has:
                 (i)     an account with:
                         (a)     a debit or credit balance, or
                         (b)     one or more security, derivative or precious metals bullion positions (including
                                 security or precious metals bullion positions held in safekeeping or in segregation), or
                 (ii)    holds one or more outside holdings for which quarterly reporting pursuant to section 3809
                         is required,
                 and
                 (iii)   there is at least one position in the account or at least one outside holding for which
                         quarterly reporting pursuant to section 3809 is required, for which a market value can be
                         determined pursuant to either clause (i) or clause (ii) of the definition of market value in
                         subsection 1201(2),
                 and
                 (iv)    the client’s account was opened at least 12 months ago.
         (2)     The annual performance report must include all of the following combined information about the
                 client’s account and outside holdings at the end of the period for which the report is made:
                 (i)     the total combined market value of all cash, security, derivative and precious metals bullion
                         positions:
                         (a)     as at July 15, 2015 or, where the account was opened prior to July 15, 2015 and the
                                 information is available, as at the account opening date,
                         (b)     as at the beginning date of the 12-month period covered by the report, and
                         (c)      as at the end date of the report,
                 (ii)    the total combined market value of all deposits and transfers in of cash, security, derivative
                         and precious metals bullion positions:
                         (a)     in the period from July 15, 2015 or, where the account was opened prior to July 15,
                                 2015 and the information is available, the period from the account opening date, to
                                 the end date of the report, and
                         (b)     in the 12-month period covered by the report,


Series 3000 | Business Conduct and Client Accounts Rules                                                          Rule 3800
                                                                 Investment Dealer and Partially Consolidated Rules

                 (iii)   the total combined market value of all withdrawals and transfers out of cash, security,
                         derivative and precious metals bullion positions:
                         (a)     In the period from July 15, 2015 or, where the account was opened prior to July 15,
                                 2015 and the information is available, the period from the account opening date to
                                 the end date of the report, and
                         (b)     In the 12-month period covered by the report,
                 (iv)    the total combined change in market value of all cash, security, derivative and precious
                         metals bullion positions:
                         (a)     for the period from July 15, 2015 or, where the account was opened prior to July 15,
                                 2015 and the information is available, the period from the account opening date to
                                 the end date of the report, determined using the following formula:
                                 Total market value change from account opening
                                 =      Closing market value
                                        [Sub-clause 3810(2)(i)(c)]
                                 -       Account opening market value
                                        [Sub-clause 3810(2)(i)(a)]
                                 -Deposits and transfers in
                                        [Sub-clause 3810(2)(ii)(a)]
                                 +      Withdrawals and transfers out
                                        [Sub-clause 3810(2)(iii)(a)], and
                         (b)     for the 12-month period covered by the report, determined using the following
                                 formula:
                                  Total 12-month market value change
                                  =     Closing market value
                                        [Sub-clause 3810(2)(i)(c)]
                                  -     Account opening market value
                                        [Sub-clause 3810(2)(i)(b)]
                                  -     Deposits and transfers in
                                        [Sub-clause 3810(2)(ii)(b)]
                                  +     Withdrawals and transfers out
                                        [Sub-clause 3810(2)(iii)(b)],
                 (v)     the amount of the annualized total percentage return calculated net of charges using a
                         money weighted rate of return calculation methodology generally accepted in the
                         securities industry for the following periods:
                         (a)     the 12-month period covered by the report,
                         (b)     the three-year period preceding the end date of the report,
                         (c)     the five year period preceding the end date of the report,
                         (d)     the 10 year period preceding the end date of the report, and



Series 3000 | Business Conduct and Client Accounts Rules                                                         Rule 3800
                                                               Investment Dealer and Partially Consolidated Rules

                         (e)     the period from July 15, 2015 or, where the account was opened prior to July 15,
                                 2015 and the information is available, the period from the account opening date to
                                 the end date of the report,
                         provided that if any portion of a period referred to in sub-clauses 3810(2)(v)(b),
                         3810(2)(v)(c) and 3810(2)(v)(d) is before July 15, 2015, the Dealer Member is not required
                         to report the annualized total percentage return for that period, and
                 (vi)    the definition of total percentage return as set out in subsection 3802(1) and a notification
                         indicating the following:
                         (a)     the total percentage return presented in the performance report was calculated net
                                 of fees / charges,
                         (b)      the calculation method used, and
                         (c)     a general explanation in plain language of what the calculation method takes into
                                 account.
         (3)     The combined information required to be provided under subsection 3810(2) must be presented
                 using text, tables and charts, and must be accompanied by notes in the performance report
                 explaining:
                 (i)     the content of the report and how a client can use the information to assess the
                         performance of the client’s investments, and
                 (ii)    the changing value of the client’s investments as reflected in the information in the report.
         (4)     The Dealer Member must send a performance report containing the combined information
                 required to be provided under subsection 3810(2) to a client every 12 months, except that:
                 (i)      the first performance report sent after a Dealer Member opens an account for a client may
                          be sent within 24 months, and
                 (ii)     any performance report sent to a client that covers the 12-month period ending on
                          December 31, 2016 is not required to include in the report the information set out in:
                         (a)     sub-clauses 3810(2)(i)(a), 3810(2)(ii)(a), 3810(2)(iii)(a) and 3810(2)(iv)(a) [Prior period
                                 comparative account activity information], and
                         (b)     sub-clauses 3810(2)(v)(b) through 3810(2)(v)(e) [Prior period comparative percentage
                                 return information], and
                 (iii)   where a performance report that covers the 12-month period ending on December 31,
                         2016 is sent to the client pursuant to clause 3810(4)(ii), all subsequent performance reports
                         for the 12-month periods ending on December 31, 2017 and each calendar year thereafter
                         may include:
                         (a)     the information required by sub-clauses 3810(2)(i)(a), 3810(2)(ii)(a), 3810(2)(iii)(a)
                                 and 3810(2)(iv)(a) [Prior period comparative account activity information] as at or for
                                 the period commencing January 1, 2016, as applicable, and
                         (b)     the information required by sub-clauses 3810(2)(v)(b) through 3810(2)(v)(e) [Prior
                                 period comparative percentage return information] provided that if any portion of a
                                 period referred to in sub-clauses 3810(2)(v)(b), 3810(2)(v)(c), and 3810(2)(v)(d), is
                                 before January 1, 2016, the Dealer Member is not required to report the annualized
                                 total percentage return for that period.

Series 3000 | Business Conduct and Client Accounts Rules                                                             Rule 3800
                                                             Investment Dealer and Partially Consolidated Rules

         (5)     For the purposes of this section 3810, the information in respect of cash, security, derivative and
                 precious metals bullion positions of a client required to be reported under section 3808 must be
                 provided in a separate report for each of the client’s accounts.
         (6)     For the purposes of this section 3810, the information in respect of cash, security, derivative and
                 precious metals bullion positions of a client required to be reported under section 3809 must be
                 included in the report for each of the client’s accounts through which these positions were
                 transacted
         (7)     Subsections 3810(5) and 3810(6) do not apply if the Dealer Member sends a single report to the
                 client that consolidates the required information for more than one of a client’s accounts and any
                 outside holdings of a client required to be reported under section 3809 provided:
                 (i)     the client has consented in writing to receiving a consolidated report,
                 and
                 (ii)    the report that is sent specifies the accounts and outside holdings for which the
                         consolidated information is being provided.
         (8)     All annual performance reports that are sent to a client, whether prepared for an individual
                 account or prepared on a consolidated account basis pursuant to subsection 3810(7), must:
                 (i)      be prepared for the same 12-month period, and
                 (ii)     include aggregated information for the same accounts and outside holdings,
                 as the annual fee/charge reports that are sent to the same client.
         (9)     Where a retail client has an account with positions in futures contracts, forward contracts,
                 contracts for difference, foreign exchange contracts and similar derivatives, the Dealer Member
                 shall not be required to send an annual performance report under this section 3810, provided the
                 Dealer Member sends the client a monthly or quarterly statement which includes the following
                 information about the client’s account in addition to the requirements set out under section
                 3808:
                 (i)      the total profit or loss realized on positions exercised, expired or closed during the period
                          covered,
                 (ii)     the unrealized profit or loss for each opened position at the end of the period covered,
                 (iii)    the profit or loss realized for each positions exercised, expired or closed during the period
                          covered, and
                 (iv)     a disclosure explaining to the client that for the period covered, the statement does not
                          provide information on the changes in market value that occurred during the period
                          covered, but provides the client with:
                          (a) profit or loss realized on positions exercised, expired or closed, and
                          (b) unrealized profit or loss for opened position at the end of the period covered.
         (10) For purposes of subsection 3810(9), all deposits, credits, withdrawals and debits made in the
              account can be disclosed as a single net deposit or net withdrawal in the statement.
3811. Fee/charge report
         (1)     A Dealer Member must send a fee/charge report to each retail client who, at the end of the 12-
                 month period covered by the report or a shorter period in the case of the first report delivered
                 after a client has opened an account, has:

Series 3000 | Business Conduct and Client Accounts Rules                                                         Rule 3800
                                                               Investment Dealer and Partially Consolidated Rules

                 (i)     an account, or
                 (ii)    holds one or more outside holdings for which quarterly reporting pursuant to section 3809
                         is required,
                 and
                 (iii)   such client paid either directly or indirectly any fee, charge or other payment, reportable
                         under subsection 3811(2) during the period covered by the report.
         (2)     The annual fee/charge report must include all of the following combined information about the
                 client’s account and outside holdings at the end of the period for which the report is made:
                 (i)     a discussion of the operating charges which might be applicable to the client’s account,
                 (ii)     the total amount of each type of operating charge related to the client’s account paid by
                          the client during the period covered by the report,
                 (iii)    the aggregate total amount of all operating charges related to the client’s account paid by
                          the client during the period covered by the report,
                 (iv)     the total amount of each type of transaction charge related to the purchase or sale of
                          securities and precious metals bullion and transactions in derivatives paid by the client
                          during the period covered by the report,
                 (v)      the aggregate total amount of all transaction charges related to the client’s account paid by
                          the client during the period covered by the report,
                 (vi)     the aggregate total amount of all charges reported under clauses 3811(2)(iii) and
                          3811(2)(v),
                 (vii) if the Dealer Member purchased or sold debt securities for the client during the period of
                       the report, either of the following:
                         (a)     the total amount of any mark-ups, mark-downs, commissions or other fees or
                                 charges the Dealer Member applied on the purchases or sales of debt securities,
                         (b)     the total amount of any commissions charged to the client by the Dealer Member on
                                 the purchases or sales of debt securities and, if the Dealer Member applied mark-ups,
                                 mark-downs or other fees or charges other than commissions on the purchases or
                                 sales of debt securities, the following notification or a notification that is substantially
                                 similar:
                                         “For debt securities purchased or sold for you during the period covered
                                         by this report, dealer firm remuneration was added to the price you paid
                                         (in the case of a purchase) or deducted from the price your received (in
                                         the case of a sale). This amount was in addition to any commissions you
                                         were charged.”,
                 (viii) the total amount of each type of payment, other than trailing commissions, that is made to
                        the Dealer Member or any of its registered individuals by a securities or derivatives issuer or
                        another registrant in relation to registerable services provided to the client during the
                        period covered by the report, accompanied by an explanation of each type of payment,
                 (ix)     if the Dealer Member received trailing commissions related to securities owned by the
                          client during the period covered by the report, the following notification or a notification
                          that is substantially similar:

Series 3000 | Business Conduct and Client Accounts Rules                                                              Rule 3800
                                                                Investment Dealer and Partially Consolidated Rules

                                 “We received $[amount] in trailing commissions in respect of securities you
                                 owned during the period covered by this report.
                                 Investment funds pay investment fund managers a fee for managing their funds.
                                 The managers pay us ongoing trailing commissions for the services and advice
                                 we provide you. The amount of the trailing commission depends on the sales
                                 charge option you chose when you purchased the fund. You are not directly
                                 charged the trailing commission or the management fee. But, these fees affect
                                 you because they reduce the amount of the fund’s return to you. Information
                                 about management fees and other charges to your investment funds is included
                                 in the prospectus or fund facts document for each fund.”,
                 (x)     if the client owned investment fund securities during the period covered by the report, the
                         following information about those securities for such period:
                         (a)     the total amount of fund expenses charged to the investment fund by its investment
                                 fund manager or any other party, after making the necessary adjustments to add
                                 performance fees and deduct fee waivers, rebates or absorptions, but excluding any
                                 charges reported as transaction charges under clause 3811(2)(iv),
                         (b)     the total amount of direct investment fund charges charged to the client by the
                                 investment fund, investment fund manager or any other party, excluding any charges
                                 reported as transaction charges under clause 3811(2)(iv),
                         (c)     the aggregate total amount of all expenses and charges reported under subclauses
                                 3811(2)(x)(a) and 3811(2)(x)(b),
                         (d)     the aggregate total amount of all Dealer Member charges and investment fund
                                 expenses and charges reported under clause 3811(2)(vi) and subclause 3811(2)(x)(c),
                         (e)     the fund expense ratio of each class or series of securities of each investment fund,
                                 including any performance fees and deducting any fee waivers, rebates or
                                 absorptions,
                         (f)     the following disclosures:
                                 (I)      if information reported under subclauses 3811(2)(x)(a), 3811(2)(x)(b) and
                                          3811(2)(x)(e) is based on an approximation or any other assumption, a
                                          notification that this is the case,
                                 (II)    in relation to any direct investment fund charges charged to the client, other
                                         than deferred sales charges, a short explanation of the type of fees that were
                                         charged,
                                 (III)   in relation to the total amount of fund expenses reported, the following
                                         notification or a notification that is substantially similar:
                                         “Fund expenses are made up of the management fee (which includes
                                         trailing commissions paid to us), operating expenses and trading costs.
                                         You don’t pay these expenses directly. They are periodically deducted
                                         from the value of your investments by the companies that manage and
                                         operate those funds. Different funds have different fund expenses. They
                                         affect you because they reduce the fund’s returns. These expenses add up


Series 3000 | Business Conduct and Client Accounts Rules                                                            Rule 3800
                                                                Investment Dealer and Partially Consolidated Rules

                                         over time. Fund expenses are expressed as an annual percentage of the
                                         total value of the fund. They correspond to the sum of the fund’s
                                         management expense ratio (MER) and trading expense ratio (TER). These
                                         costs are already reflected in the current values reported for your fund
                                         investments.
                                         The number shown here is the estimated total dollar amount you paid in
                                         fund expenses for all the investment funds you owned last year. This
                                         amount depends on each of your funds’ fund expenses and the amount
                                         you invested in each fund.”,
                                 (IV) in relation to the fund expense ratios required to be reported under subclause
                                      3811(2)(x)(e), the following notification or a notification that is substantially
                                      similar:
                                         “Please refer to the prospectus or fund facts document of each
                                         investment fund for more detailed information about fund expenses and
                                         fund performance.
                                         Please refer to your latest account statement for more information about
                                         the market value and the number of securities of the investment funds
                                         you currently own.”,
                                 (V)     in relation to any deferred sales charges paid by the client, the following
                                         notification or a notification that is substantially similar:
                                         “You paid this cost because you redeemed your units or shares of a fund
                                         purchased under a deferred sales charge (DSC) option before the end of
                                         the redemption fee schedule and a redemption fee was payable to the
                                         investment fund company. Information about these and other fees can be
                                         found in the prospectus or fund facts document for each investment fund
                                         made available at the time of purchase. The redemption fee was
                                         deducted from the redemption amount you received.”,
                                 (VI) in relation to an investment fund or securities of an investment fund where the
                                      manager of the investment fund is incorporated, continued or organized under
                                      the laws of a foreign jurisdiction, and the information reported for those
                                      securities under subclauses 3811(2)(x)(a), 3811(2)(x)(b) and 3811(2)(x)(e) is
                                      based on information disclosed under the laws of a foreign jurisdiction, the
                                      following notification or a notification that is substantially similar:
                                         “This report includes information about the fund expenses and fund
                                         expense ratio of foreign investment funds. Please note that this
                                         information may not be directly comparable to equivalent information for
                                         Canadian investment funds, that may include different types of fees.”,
                                 (VII) in relation to any structured product, labour sponsored investment fund or
                                       investment fund the securities of which are distributed solely under an
                                       exemption from the prospectus requirement in compliance with securities
                                       laws, the following notification or a notification that is substantially similar:

Series 3000 | Business Conduct and Client Accounts Rules                                                               Rule 3800
                                                              Investment Dealer and Partially Consolidated Rules

                                         “Please note that other products you may own or may have owned during
                                         the reporting period, such as exempt market investment funds, labour
                                         sponsored investment funds or structured products, may have embedded
                                         fees that are not reported here. You can contact us for more
                                         information.”,
                 (xi)    if the Dealer Member knows or has reason to believe that the client paid, to third parties,
                         custodial fees, intermediary fees or interest charges related to securities, precious metals
                         bullion and derivatives owned by the client during the period covered by the report and
                         those fees or charges are not required to be reported to the client by the Dealer Member
                         under this section, the following notification or a notification that is substantially similar
                                 “The costs in this report may not include any fees you pay directly to third
                                 parties, including custodial fees, intermediary fees or interest charges that may
                                 be deducted from your account. You can contact those service providers for
                                 more information.”,
                 (xii) the following notification or a notification that is substantially similar:
                                 “What can you do with this information? Take action by contacting your advisor
                                 to discuss the fees you pay, the impact they have on the long-term performance
                                 of your portfolio and the value you receive in return. If you are a self-directed
                                 investor, consider how fees impact the long-term performance of your portfolio,
                                 and possible ways to reduce those costs.”.
         (3)     A Dealer Member may exclude the information required under subclauses 3811(2)(x)(a) and
                 3811(2)(x)(e) and any approximations of such information for a newly established investment
                 fund in which case the following notification or a notification that is substantially similar must be
                 included in the report:
                         “The total amount of fund expenses reported may not include cost information for
                         newly established investment funds.”,
         (4)     A Dealer Member is not required to report the information under subclauses 3811(2)(x)(a),
                 3811(2)(x)(b), 3811(2)(x)(e), and any approximations of such information, or the disclosures
                 under paragraphs 3811(2)(x)(f)(I) to 3811(2)(x)(f)(V) and clause 3811(2)(xi) with regards to:
                 (i)      a labour sponsored investment fund, or
                 (ii)     an investment fund whose securities are distributed solely under an exemption from the
                          prospectus requirement in compliance with securities laws.
         (5)     A Dealer Member is permitted to report a reasonable approximation of the information required
                 under subclauses 3811(2)(x)(a), 3811(2)(x)(b) and 3811(2)(x)(e), when relying on reasonable
                 approximations to determine such information pursuant to subsection 3811(6).
         (6)     For the purposes of reporting the information under subclauses 3811(2)(x)(a), 3811(2)(x)(b) and
                 3811(2)(x)(e) and the disclosures under paragraphs 3811(2)(x)(f)(I), 3811(2)(x)(f)(II),
                 3811(2)(x)(f)(V) and 3811(2)(x)(f)(VI), the Dealer Member must:
                 (i)     rely on the information provided by the investment fund manager, pursuant to section
                         14.1.1 of National Instrument 31-103, unless the Dealer Member reasonably believes the
                         information provided is incomplete or misleading, and

Series 3000 | Business Conduct and Client Accounts Rules                                                             Rule 3800
                                                             Investment Dealer and Partially Consolidated Rules

                 (ii)    where no reliable information can be obtained pursuant to clause 3811(6)(i), make
                         reasonable efforts to obtain or determine by other means the required information, or a
                         reasonable approximation of such information, and
                 (iii)   where it reasonably believes it cannot obtain or determine under clause 3811(6)(ii)
                         information that is not misleading, exclude such information and disclose in the relevant
                         statement or report that the information is excluded from calculations or not reported.
         (7)     For the purposes of this section 3811, the information in respect of security, derivative and
                 precious metals bullion positions of a client required to be reported under section 3808 must be
                 provided in a separate report for each of the client’s accounts.
         (8)     For the purposes of this section 3811, the information in respect of outside holdings of a client
                 required to be reported under section 3809 must be included in the report for each of the client’s
                 accounts through which these positions were transacted.
         (9)     Subsections 3811(7) and 3811(8) do not apply if the Dealer Member sends a single report to the
                 client that consolidates the required information for more than one of a client’s accounts and any
                 outside holdings of a client required to be reported under section 3809 provided:
                 (i)      the client has consented in writing to receiving a consolidated report, and
                 (ii)     the report that is sent specifies the accounts and outside holdings for which the
                          consolidated information is being provided.
         (10) All annual fee/charge reports that are sent to a client, whether prepared for an individual account
              or prepared on a consolidated account basis pursuant to subsection 3811(9), must:
                 (i)      be prepared for the same 12-month period, and
                 (ii)     include aggregated information for the same accounts and outside holdings,
                 as the annual performance reports that are sent to the same client.
         (11) Where a retail client has an account with positions in futures contracts, forward contracts,
              contracts for difference, foreign exchange contracts and similar derivatives, the Dealer Member
              shall not be required to send an annual fee/charge report under this section 3811, provided the
              Dealer Member sends the client a monthly or quarterly statement which includes the following
              information about the client’s account for the period covered:
                 (i) itemized transaction charge and operating charge information in accordance with this
                     section 3811, and
              (ii)   if applicable, itemized information on compensation received by the Dealer Member in
                     connection with a transaction.
         (12) For purposes of clause 3811(11)(ii), the following information will be acceptable where the
              compensation received by the Dealer Member relates to a bulk distribution arrangement:
              (i)    a calculated product distribution compensation amount, or
              (ii)   where the distribution compensation amount cannot be unbundled from the manufacturer
                     compensation amount,
                    (a) the entire compensation amount, and
                         (b)     a note explaining that the amount disclosed is the entire product compensation
                                 amount.


Series 3000 | Business Conduct and Client Accounts Rules                                                      Rule 3800
                                                                Investment Dealer and Partially Consolidated Rules

3812. Secondary or subsidiary records
         (1)     A Dealer Member must maintain the following ledgers (or other records):
                 (i)      securities in transfer,
                 (ii)     dividends and interest received,
                 (iii)    securities borrowed and securities loaned,
                 (iv)     monies borrowed and monies loaned (together with a record of the collateral and any
                          substitutions in such collateral),
                 (v)      securities failed to receive and failed to deliver, and
                 (vi)    money, securities and property received to margin, guarantee or secure the trades or
                         contracts of clients, and all funds accruing to clients, which must be segregated for the
                         benefit of clients under any applicable laws.
3813. Securities and precious metals bullion record
         (1)     A Dealer Member must maintain a record or a ledger, as of the trade or settlement dates
                 (including positions in safekeeping) for each long and short security and precious metals bullion
                 position maintained for the Dealer Member's account or for the account of clients.
         (2)     The record or ledger must contain the following:
                 (i)      the location of all long positions,
                 (ii)     the offsetting position to all short positions, and
                 (iii)    the name or designation of the account in which each position is maintained.
3814. Derivatives record
         (1)     A Dealer Member must maintain a record or ledger, as of the transaction date, for each long and
                 short derivatives position maintained for the Dealer Member's account or for the account of
                 clients.
         (2)     The record or ledger must contain the name or designation of the account in which each position
                 is maintained.
         (3)     As part of the records required under subsection 3814(1), a Dealer Member must maintain a daily
                 record that separately identifies the client positions and associated collateral for futures contracts
                 and futures contract options that are subject to the domestic gross customer margin model.
         (4)     A Dealer Member must maintain a client identification record, for accounts subject to the domestic
                 gross customer margin model, that includes the client identification information required by the
                 clearing corporation for porting of client accounts.
3815. Memoranda of orders, transactions and other instructions
         (1)     A Dealer Member must maintain an adequate record of each order, transaction or other
                 instruction given or received for all purchases and sales of securities and precious metals bullion
                 and transactions in derivatives, whether executed or unexecuted, showing at a minimum the
                 following:
                 (i)      the terms and conditions of the order, transaction or instruction and of any modification or
                          cancellation thereof,

Series 3000 | Business Conduct and Client Accounts Rules                                                        Rule 3800
                                                              Investment Dealer and Partially Consolidated Rules

                 (ii)     the account to which the order, transaction or instruction relates,
                 (iii)    the time of entry of the order, transaction or instruction and, where it is entered pursuant
                          to the exercise of discretionary power of a Dealer Member, a statement to that effect,
                 (iv)     where the order, transaction or instruction relates to an omnibus account, the component
                          accounts within the omnibus account on whose behalf it is to be executed, and the
                          allocation among the component accounts intended on execution,
                 (v)      to the extent feasible, the time of execution or cancellation,
                 (vi)     the price at which the order, transaction or instruction was executed,
                 (vii)    the time of report of execution, and
                 (viii) whether the transactions are opening or closing transactions (where required by the
                        marketplace).
         (2)     A Dealer Member must record the name, sales number, or designation of the person placing the
                 order, transaction or instruction, if it is placed by an individual other than:
                 (i)      the account holder, or
                 (ii)     an individual authorized in writing to direct orders or instructions for the account.
3816. Trade confirmations
         (1)     A Dealer Member must promptly send the client a written confirmation of all purchases and sales
                 of securities and precious metals bullion and transactions in derivatives, and copies of notices of
                 all other debits and credits of money, securities, property, proceeds of loans and other items for
                 the client’s account.
         (2)     The written confirmation must contain, at a minimum, the day and the marketplace or
                 marketplaces where the trade took place, or marketplace disclosure language acceptable to the
                 Corporation; the fee or other charge, if any, levied by any securities regulatory authority in
                 connection with the trade; the name of the salesperson, if any, involved in the transaction; the
                 name of the dealer, if any, used by the Dealer Member as its agent to effect the trade, the
                 settlement date of the trade:
                 and
                 (i)      in the case of trades in securities and precious metals bullion:
                          (a)      the quantity and description,
                          (b)      the consideration,
                          (c)      whether or not the person or company that executed the trade acted as principal or
                                   agent, and
                         (d)     must maintain and make available to the client or the Corporation, upon request, the
                                 name of the person or company from or to or through whom the security or precious
                                 metals bullion was bought or sold, if acting as an agent in a trade upon an equity
                                 marketplace,
                 and



Series 3000 | Business Conduct and Client Accounts Rules                                                          Rule 3800
                                                                 Investment Dealer and Partially Consolidated Rules

                 (ii)     in the case of transactions in futures contracts, forward contracts, contracts for difference,
                          foreign exchange contracts and similar derivatives:
                          (a)      the contract underlying interest,
                          (b)      the contract quantity bought or sold,
                          (c)      if applicable, the quantity of the underlying interest bought or sold,
                          (d)      the contract delivery date, and
                         (e)     the price at which the contract was entered into,
                 and
                 (iii)    in the case of transactions in options contracts, futures contract options and similar
                          derivatives:
                          (a)      the contract underlying interest,
                          (b)      the contract quantity bought or sold,
                          (c)      the contract type,
                          (d)      the contract premium,
                          (e)      the contract exercise or striking price,
                          (f)      the contract declaration date,
                          (g)      if applicable:
                                  (I)      the futures contract that is the subject of the futures contract option,
                                  (II)     the date of the futures contract that is the subject of the futures contract
                                           option,
                 and
                 (iv)    in the case of trades in mortgage-backed securities, and subject to the proviso below:
                         (a)     the original principal amount of the trade,
                         (b)     the description of the security (including interest rate and maturity date),
                         (c)     the remaining principal amount (RPA) factor,
                         (d)     the purchase/sale price per $100 of original principal amount,
                         (e)     the accrued interest,
                         (f)     the total settlement amount, and
                         (g)     the settlement date,
                         provided that in the case of trades entered into from the first business day of the month to
                         the fourth business day of the month, inclusive, a preliminary confirmation shall be issued
                         showing the trade date and the information in sub-clauses 3816(2)(iv)(a), 3816(2)(iv)(b),
                         3816(2)(iv)(d) and 3816(2)(iv)(g) and indicating that the information in sub-clauses
                         3816(2)(iv)(c), 3816(2)(iv)(e) and 3816(2)(iv)(f) cannot yet be determined and that a final
                         confirmation will be issued as soon as such information is available. After the remaining
                         principal amount factor for the security is available from the central payor and transfer
                         agent, a final confirmation shall be issued including all of the information required in
                         subsection 3816(2), and

Series 3000 | Business Conduct and Client Accounts Rules                                                              Rule 3800
                                                                 Investment Dealer and Partially Consolidated Rules

                 (v)      in the case of transactions in over-the-counter securities other than debt securities:
                          (a)      where the confirmation is sent to a retail client:
                                  (I)      the amount of each transaction charge, deferred sales charge or other charge
                                           in respect of the transaction, and
                                  (II)     the total amount of all charges in respect of the transaction,
                          (b)      where the confirmation is sent to an institutional client:
                                  (I)      the commission, if any, charged in respect of the transaction,
                 and
                 (vi)    in the case of transactions in debt securities:
                         (a)     in the case of a purchase, where the debt security is a stripped coupon or a residual
                                 debt instrument:
                                 (I)      the yield thereon calculated on a semi-annual basis in a manner consistent with
                                          the yield calculation for the debt instrument which has been stripped, and
                                 (II)     the yield thereon calculated on an annual basis in a manner consistent with the
                                          yield calculation for other debt securities which are commonly regarded as
                                          being competitive in the market with such coupons or residuals such as
                                          guaranteed investment certificates, bank deposit receipts and other
                                          indebtedness for which the term and interest rate is fixed,
                         (b)     in the case of a purchase, where the debt security is neither a stripped coupon nor a
                                 residual debt instrument:
                                 (I)      the yield to maturity calculated in a manner consistent with market
                                          conventions for the security traded,
                                 (II)     where the debt security is subject to call prior to maturity through any means,
                                          the notation of “callable” must be included, and
                                 (III)    where the debt security has a variable coupon rate, the notation “The coupon
                                          rate may vary.” must be included,
                         (c)     where the debt security trade is not a primary market transaction and the trade
                                 confirmation is being sent to a retail client, either of the following:
                                 (I)      the total amount of any mark-up or mark-down, commission or other service
                                          charges the Dealer Member applied to the transaction, or
                                 (II)     the total amount of any commission charged to the client by the Dealer
                                          Member and, if the Dealer Member applied a mark-up or mark-down or any
                                          service charge other than a commission, the following notification or a
                                          notification that is substantially similar:
                                         “Dealer firm remuneration has been added to the price of this security (in the
                                         case of a purchase) or deducted from the price of this security (in the case of a
                                         sale). This amount was in addition to any commission this trade confirmation
                                         shows was charged to you.”,
                 and
                 (vii)    in the case of transactions in

Series 3000 | Business Conduct and Client Accounts Rules                                                            Rule 3800
                                                                 Investment Dealer and Partially Consolidated Rules

                          (a)     over-the-counter securities other than debt securities or a security that is undergoing
                                  a primary market transaction, and over-the-counter derivatives other than contracts
                                  with non-standardized terms that are customized to the needs of a particular client
                                  and for which there is no secondary market, and
                          (b)     the confirmation is being sent to a retail client, either of the following:
                                  (I)      the total amount of any mark-up or mark-down, commission or other service
                                           charges the Dealer Member applied to the transaction,
                                  (II)    one of the following notifications or a notification that is substantially similar:
                                           “Dealer firm remuneration has been added to the price of this security
                                           (in the case of a purchase) or deducted from the price of this security (in
                                           the case of a sale).”
                                           “Dealer firm remuneration has been included as an adjustment to the price of
                                           this derivatives transaction.”,
                 and
                 (viii) in the case of transactions involving:
                         (a)      securities of the Dealer Member, or
                         (b)      securities of a related issuer of the Dealer Member, or
                         (c)      securities of a connected issuer of the Dealer Member, or
                         (d)      securities referenced in sub-clauses 3816(2)(viii)(a) through 3816(2)(viii)(c) that are in
                                  the course of a distribution to the public, or
                         (e)      derivatives whose underlying interest is referenced in sub-clauses 3816(2)(viii)(a)
                                  through 3816(2)(viii)(d),
                         the trade confirmation must indicate that the transactions involve securities of the Dealer
                         Member, a related issuer of the Dealer Member or a connected issuer of the Dealer
                         Member or a derivative whose underlying interest is a security of the Dealer Member, a
                         related issuer of the Dealer Member or a connected issuer of the Dealer Member, as the
                         case may be,
                 and
                 (ix)    in the case of a Dealer Member controlled by or affiliated with a financial institution, the
                         relationship between the Dealer Member and the financial institution shall be disclosed on
                         each trade confirmation issued in connection with a trade in securities of a mutual fund
                         sponsored by the financial institution or a corporation controlled by or affiliated with the
                         financial institution, except where the names of the Dealer Member and the mutual fund
                         are sufficiently similar to indicate that they are controlled by or affiliated with the same
                         financial institution,
                 and
                 (x)     notwithstanding the provisions of this section 3816, a Dealer Member shall not be required
                         to provide a confirmation to a client in respect of:
                         (a)     a trade in a managed account, provided that:


Series 3000 | Business Conduct and Client Accounts Rules                                                               Rule 3800
                                                                     Investment Dealer and Partially Consolidated Rules

                                 (I)      prior to the trade, the client has consented in writing to waive the trade
                                          confirmation requirement,
                                 (II)     the client may terminate a waiver by notice in writing. The termination notice
                                          shall be effective upon receipt of the written notice by the Dealer Member, for
                                          trades following the date of receipt,
                                 (III)    the provision of a confirmation is not required under any securities laws of the
                                          jurisdiction in which the client resides or the Dealer Member has obtained an
                                          exemption from any such applicable laws by the responsible securities
                                          regulatory authority, and
                                 (IV)     where:
                                         (A)      a person other than the Dealer Member manages the account:
                                                 (i)       a trade confirmation has been sent to the manager of the account,
                                                           and
                                                 (ii)      the Dealer Member complies with section 3808, or
                                          (B)     the Dealer Member manages the account:
                                                  (i)      the account is not charged any commissions or fees based on the
                                                           volume or value of transactions in the account,
                                                  (ii)     the Dealer Member sends to the client a monthly statement that is
                                                           in compliance with section 3808 and contains all of the information
                                                           required to be contained in a confirmation under this section 3816
                                                           except:
                                                           (a)   the day and the marketplace or marketplaces upon which
                                                                 the trade took place, or marketplace disclosure language
                                                                 acceptable to the Corporation,
                                                           (b)   the fee or other charge, if any, levied by any securities
                                                                 regulatory authority in connection with the trade,
                                                           (c)   the name of the salesperson, if any, in the transaction,
                                                           (d)   the name of the dealer, if any, used by the Dealer Member as
                                                                 its agent to effect the trade, and
                                                           (e)   must maintain and make available to the client or the
                                                                 Corporation, upon request, the name of the person or
                                                                 company from or to or through whom the security was
                                                                 bought or sold, if acting as an agent in a trade upon an
                                                                 equity marketplace,
                                                  (iii)    the Dealer Member maintains the information not required to be
                                                           in the monthly statement pursuant to sub-paragraph
                                                           3816(2)(x)(a)(IV)(B)(ii) and discloses to the client on the monthly
                                                           statement that such information will be provided to the client on
                                                           request.




Series 3000 | Business Conduct and Client Accounts Rules                                                                     Rule 3800
                                                                  Investment Dealer and Partially Consolidated Rules

                         (b)     a trade in a delivery against payment or receipt against payment trade account,
                                 provided:
                                 (I)      the trade is either subject to or matched in accordance with broker-to-broker
                                          or institutional trade matching requirements under Corporation requirements
                                          or securities laws,
                                 (II)     the Dealer Member maintains an electronic audit trail of the trade under
                                          Corporation requirements or securities laws,
                                 (III)    prior to the trade, the client has agreed in writing to waive receipt of trade
                                          confirmations from the Dealer Member,
                                 (IV)     the client is either:
                                          (A)     another Dealer Member who is reporting or affirming trade details
                                                  through an acceptable trade matching utility in accordance with sections
                                                  4751, 4753, 4754, 4755 and 4756, or
                                          (B)     an institutional client who is matching delivery against payment/ receipt
                                                  against payment account trades (either directly or through a custodian)
                                                  in accordance with National Instrument 24-101,
                                 (V) the Dealer Member and the client have real-time access to, and can download
                                     into their own system from the acceptable trade matching utility’s or the
                                     matching service utility’s system, trade details that are similar to the prescribed
                                     information under this section 3816,
                                 (VI)     for trades subject to broker-to-broker trade matching, the Dealer Member has
                                          a quarterly compliant trade percentage calculated using the methodology in
                                          section 4756 of greater than or equal to 85% for at least two of the last four
                                          quarters, and
                                 (VII) for trades subject to institutional trade matching, the Dealer Member has a
                                       quarterly compliant trade percentage of greater than or equal to 85% for at
                                       least two of the last four quarters.
                                 A client may terminate their trade confirmation waiver, referred to in sub-clause
                                 3816(2)(x)(b), by providing a written notice confirming this fact to the Dealer
                                 Member. The termination notice takes effect upon the Dealer Member’s receipt of
                                 the notice.
                         (c)     a swap transaction, provided:
                                  (I)      the Dealer Member enters into a standard industry agreement with the client
                                           that is acceptable to the Corporation, and
                                  (II)     the agreement sets out the terms for a client to receive a confirmation of a
                                           swap transaction and the key terms of the confirmation.
                         (d)     a derivatives transaction where the Dealer Member is the executing broker and the
                                 transaction is executed for an institutional client under a give-up agreement,
                                 provided
                                 (I)      the client, executing Dealer Member and Dealer Member responsible to clear
                                          and settle the transaction are parties to the give-up agreement

Series 3000 | Business Conduct and Client Accounts Rules                                                              Rule 3800
                                                                  Investment Dealer and Partially Consolidated Rules

                                 (II)     the clearing Dealer Member is responsible, under the give-up agreement, for
                                          issuing the transaction confirmation to the client, and
                                 (III)    the executing Dealer Member:
                                          (A)     executes the transaction in accordance with the client’s instructions to
                                                  give up such transaction to the clearing Dealer Member,
                                          (B)     provides limited transaction execution service to the client under the
                                                  give-up agreement and does not maintain client account documentation,
                                                  or receive the client’s money, securities, margin or collateral, and
                                          (C)     provides the clearing Dealer Member a monthly invoice with details of
                                                  the give-up transactions of the client and the clearing Dealer Member
                                                  reconciles the transactions details with its own record.
3817. Options and similar derivatives in which the Dealer Member has an interest
         (1)     A Dealer Member must maintain a record of all puts, calls, spreads, straddles and other options or
                 similar derivatives in which the Dealer Member has any direct or indirect interest or which the
                 Dealer Member has granted or guaranteed, and the record must contain, at the minimum, an
                 identification of the security or other underlying interest and the number of units involved.
3818. Margin call records
         (1)     A Dealer Member must maintain a record of all margin calls whether such calls are made in
                 writing, by telephone or other means of communication.
3819. Account transfer records
         (1)     Pursuant to Part B of Rule 4800, a Dealer Member must maintain a record of all communications
                 concerning account transfers.
3820. – 3834. Reserved.
3835. Option of earlier date
         (1)     Dealer Members have the option of providing clients with the following position cost and
                 performance information:
                 (i)      position cost information included in client account statements [Definition of cost in
                          subsection 3802(1) and clauses 3808(3)(vii) and 3808(3)(ix)],
                 (ii)     position cost information included in the report on client positions held outside of the
                          Dealer Member [Definition of position cost in subsection 3802(1) and clauses 3809(2)(iii)
                          and 3809(2)(vi)],
                 that is prepared as at a date earlier than December 31, 2015.
         (2)     Dealer Members have the option of providing clients with the following position cost and
                 performance information:
                 (i)      activity information included in the annual performance report [clauses 3810(2)(i) through
                          3810(2)(iv)], and
                 (ii)     percentage return information included in the annual performance report [clause
                          3810(2)(v)],

Series 3000 | Business Conduct and Client Accounts Rules                                                              Rule 3800
                                                               Investment Dealer and Partially Consolidated Rules

                 that is prepared for a period that begins on a date earlier than July 15, 2015.
         (3)     Where the option in subsection 3835(1) is pursued, all of the position cost information referenced
                 in clauses 3835(1)(i) and 3835(1)(ii) must be prepared for all similar clients as at the same date.
         (4)     Where the option in subsection 3835(2) is pursued, all of the activity and percentage return
                 information referenced in clauses 3835(2)(i) and 3835(2)(ii) must be prepared for all similar
                 clients as at the same date.
3836. – 3844. Reserved.
3845. Timing of the sending of documents to clients
         (1)     All confirmations, statements, reports and other documents that are required to be sent to
                 clients under sections 3803 through 3819 must be sent promptly to clients.
         (2)     The following documents must be sent to retail clients together:
                 (i)     performance report [section 3810], and
                 (ii)    fee / charge report [section 3811].
         (3)     The following documents must be sent to retail clients within 10 days after the client account
                 statement for the monthly or quarterly period ending on the same date is sent:
                 (i)      report on client positions held outside of the Dealer Member [section 3809], and
                 (ii)     performance report and fee/charge report [sections 3810 and 3811].
3846. Client reporting responsibility
         (1)     A Dealer Member who acts as a carrying broker, or only provides trade execution, clearing,
                 settlement or custody services or a combination of these services, to another Dealer Member,
                 Mutual Fund Dealer Member, portfolio manager, exempt market dealer or their respective clients,
                 with regards to a client account or outside holding positions, is exempt from the responsibility to
                 send:
                 (i)     a performance report to the client, pursuant to section 3810, and
                 (ii)     a fee/charge report to the client, pursuant to section 3811, except for its own service fees
                          and charges to the client,
                 regarding such a client account or outside holding positions, unless it has undertaken to send such
                 reports on behalf of the other Dealer Member, Mutual Fund Dealer Member, portfolio manager or
                 exempt market dealer pursuant to an outsourcing or service arrangement.
3847. Corporation exemptions
         (1)     The Corporation may exempt a Dealer Member from the applicable reporting requirements under
                 sections 3809, 3810 and 3811 with respect to client’s outside holdings, when the costs of requiring
                 the Dealer Member to comply with such requirements significantly outweigh the benefits to the
                 Dealer Member’s clients from reporting under these requirements.
         (2)     The Corporation will grant such exemption if it is satisfied that to do so would not prejudice the
                 interests of the Dealer Member’s clients, the public or the Dealer Member.
         (3)     In granting an exemption under section 3847, the Corporation may impose any terms and
                 conditions it considers necessary.


Series 3000 | Business Conduct and Client Accounts Rules                                                         Rule 3800
                                                           Investment Dealer and Partially Consolidated Rules

3848. – 3899. Reserved.




Series 3000 | Business Conduct and Client Accounts Rules                                               Rule 3800
                                                             Investment Dealer and Partially Consolidated Rules


RULE 3900 | SUPERVISION

3901. Introduction
         (1)     Rule 3900 sets out the Dealer Member’s obligation to supervise its business and operations. The
                 rule is divided into seven parts as follows:
                  Part A – General supervision requirements
                              [sections 3904 through 3918]
                  Part B – Supervision of all accounts
                              [sections 3925 through 3927]
                  Part C – Supervision of retail client accounts
                              [sections 3945 through 3948]
                  Part D – Supervision of institutional client accounts
                             [sections 3950 and 3951]
                  Part E – Supervision of order execution only accounts
                              [section 3955]
                  Part F – Supervision of derivatives accounts
                              [sections 3960 through 3964]
                  Part G - Supervision of discretionary accounts and managed accounts
                             [sections 3970 through 3973]
         (2)     Appropriate supervision of all aspects of a Dealer Member’s business and operations is a
                 fundamental responsibility of the Dealer Member. The Dealer Member’s policies and procedures
                 that specifically address its supervision system must remain up-to-date at all times, based on
                 current Corporation requirements and applicable laws.
         (3)     The Dealer Member’s board of directors is responsible for ensuring that an appropriate
                 supervision system is in place.
3902. – 3903. Reserved.

PART A – GENERAL SUPERVISION REQUIREMENTS
3904. Policies and procedures
         (1)     A Dealer Member’s policies and procedures must establish a supervisory system to supervise the
                 activities of all its employees and Approved Persons that provides reasonable assurance they
                 comply with Corporation requirements and securities laws.
         (2)     As part of its supervisory system, the Dealer Member, at a minimum, must:
                 (i)     have policies and procedures that specifically address supervision of its employees and
                         Approved Persons,
                 (ii)    have policies and procedures relating to supervision that provide reasonable assurance of
                         compliance with Corporation requirements, securities laws and applicable laws,
                 (iii)   ensure all supervisory policies and procedures are in writing, and




Series 3000 | Business Conduct and Client Accounts Rules                                                     Rule 3900
                                                           Investment Dealer and Partially Consolidated Rules


                 (iv)    amend its policies and procedures relating to supervision within a reasonable time after
                         changes in Corporation requirements, or securities laws are made.
         (3)     A Dealer Member must communicate its policies and procedures to all relevant employees and
                 Approved Persons and must:
                 (i)     provide its sales and supervisory employees and Approved Persons with the Dealer
                         Member’s sales practices policies and procedures relevant to their functions,
                 (ii)    obtain and record acknowledgements from all sales and supervisory employees and
                         Approved Persons that they have read and understood the policies and procedures relevant
                         to their respective roles and responsibilities,
                 (iii)   provide introductory and continuing education to all Approved Persons on the Dealer
                         Member’s policies and procedures and any relevant changes to them,
                 (iv)    communicate information relating to Corporation requirements and applicable laws, to all
                         sales employees and other Approved Persons to whom it is relevant,
                 (v)     have policies and procedures that specifically address the method and timing of the
                         distribution of compliance related notices,
                 (vi)    promptly communicate changes in its policies and procedures to all relevant employees and
                         Approved Persons, and
                 (vii) have procedures to provide reasonable assurance that each employee and Approved
                       Person understands their responsibilities under the Dealer Member’s policies and
                       procedures.
3905. Supervisory personnel and resources
         (1)     A Dealer Member must assign sufficient personnel and commit adequate resources necessary to
                 fully and properly apply and enforce its policies and procedures.
         (2)     A Dealer Member must appoint as many Supervisors as necessary to properly supervise its
                 employees and Approved Persons taking into account the scope and complexity of the Dealer
                 Member’s business.
         (3)     A Dealer Member must designate as many Executives as necessary to ensure compliance with
                 Corporation requirements, taking into account the scope and complexity of the Dealer Member’s
                 business.
         (4)     A Dealer Member must designate Supervisors and Executives, with the qualifications and
                 authority necessary to fully carry out the responsibilities assigned to them.
         (5)     A Dealer Member must take reasonable steps to ensure all of its Supervisors and Executives are
                 fully proficient and understand the products that employees and Approved Persons under their
                 supervision trade in or advise on, as well as the services these employees and Approved Persons
                 provide, to the degree necessary to properly supervise those employees and Approved Persons.
         (6)     A Dealer Member must have procedures in place that ensure that Supervisors are properly
                 performing their supervisory functions.
3906. Responsibilities of the Supervisor
         (1)     Each Supervisor must fully and properly supervise each employee and Approved Person under
                 their authority in accordance with:


Series 3000 | Business Conduct and Client Accounts Rules                                                       Rule 3900
                                                            Investment Dealer and Partially Consolidated Rules


                 (i)     the supervisory responsibilities assigned to the Supervisor,
                 (ii)    the Dealer Member’s policies and procedures, and
                 (iii)   Corporation requirements and securities laws.
3907. Delegation of supervisory tasks
         (1)     A Supervisor may delegate supervisory tasks and procedures, but not the responsibility for their
                 performance.
         (2)     Any delegation of supervisory tasks must not be contrary to Corporation requirements, securities
                 laws and applicable laws.
         (3)     A delegate must be qualified to perform the assigned tasks by virtue of registration, training or
                 experience.
         (4)     The Supervisor must:
                 (i)      inform the delegate of the tasks delegated to them and what is expected of them in the
                          performance of the delegated tasks, in writing,
                 (ii)    ensure that the delegate adequately performs the delegated tasks, and
                 (iii)   establish reporting mechanisms for issues arising from the performance of delegated tasks.
         (5)     The Dealer Member must maintain a record of the terms of the delegation, as well as the
                 Supervisor’s follow up and review of the delegated tasks.
         (6)     The Dealer Member must inform the Supervisor of specific functions that cannot be delegated.
3908. Supervision records
         (1)     A Dealer Member must maintain a record of the names of Supervisors, their supervisory
                 responsibilities and the date each Supervisor was designated.
         (2)     A Dealer Member must have a system in place to record the review and approval, conducted by
                 any Supervisor that is required under Corporation requirements.
         (3)     A Dealer Member must maintain adequate records of supervisory activity, including on-site
                 branch reviews, compliance issues identified and the resolution of such issues.
         (4)     Where supervision records are kept at a branch office, the Dealer Member must conduct periodic
                 on-site reviews of branch office supervision and record keeping.
         (5)     The records set out in section 3908 must be kept for the period set out in section 3803.
3909. Responsibilities of the Executive
         (1)     Each Executive must supervise and direct the activities of the Dealer Member, and its employees
                 and Approved Persons, in accordance with the areas of its responsibility, to provide reasonable
                 assurance of compliance with Corporation requirements and securities laws.
3910. Responsibilities of the Ultimate Designated Person
         (1)     The Ultimate Designated Person is responsible to the Corporation for the conduct of the Dealer
                 Member and the supervision of its employees and Approved Persons.
         (2)     The Ultimate Designated Person must:




Series 3000 | Business Conduct and Client Accounts Rules                                                     Rule 3900
                                                             Investment Dealer and Partially Consolidated Rules


                  (i)     supervise the activities of the Dealer Member, and the activities of each individual acting
                          on the Dealer Member’s behalf, that are directed towards ensuring compliance with
                          Corporation requirements and securities laws, and
                 (ii)     promote compliance by the Dealer Member, and each individual acting on its behalf, with
                          Corporation requirements and securities laws.
3911. Reserved.
3912. Responsibilities of the Chief Compliance Officer
         (1)     The Chief Compliance Officer must:
                 (i)     establish and maintain policies and procedures to assess compliance by the Dealer Member
                         and individuals acting on its behalf with Corporation requirements and securities laws,
                         other than those required under subsection 3913(1),
                 (ii)    monitor and assess compliance by the Dealer Member and individuals acting on its behalf
                         with Corporation requirements and securities laws, and
                 (iii)   report to the Ultimate Designated Person as soon as possible if there is any indication that
                         the Dealer Member or any individual acting on its behalf may be in non-compliance with
                         Corporation requirements or securities laws, other than those required under subsection
                         3913(1), and:
                         (a)     the non-compliance creates a reasonable risk of harm to a client,
                         (b)     the non-compliance creates a reasonable risk of harm to the capital markets, or
                         (c)     the non-compliance is part of a pattern of non-compliance.
         (2)     The Chief Compliance Officer must have access to the Ultimate Designated Person and the Dealer
                 Member’s board of directors as necessary to carry out their responsibilities.
3913. Responsibilities of the Chief Financial Officer
         (1)     The Chief Financial Officer must:
                 (i)     establish and maintain policies and procedures for the Dealer Member relating to financial
                         Corporation requirements,
                 (ii)    monitor adherence to the Dealer Member’s policies and procedures to provide reasonable
                         assurance that the Dealer Member complies with the financial Corporation requirements,
                 (iii)   identify any breaches of approved capital usage limits and report them in accordance with
                         section 4116; and
                 (iv)    report to the Ultimate Designated Person as soon as possible if there is any indication that
                         the Dealer Member or any individual acting on its behalf may be in non-compliance with
                         the financial requirements of the Corporation and:
                         (a)     the non-compliance creates a reasonable risk of harm to a client,
                         (b)     the non-compliance creates a reasonable risk of harm to the capital markets, or
                         (c)     the non-compliance is part of a pattern of non-compliance.
         (2)      The Chief Financial Officer must have access to the Ultimate Designated Person and the Dealer
                  Member’s board of directors as necessary to carry out their responsibilities.
3914. Reserved.



Series 3000 | Business Conduct and Client Accounts Rules                                                        Rule 3900
                                                            Investment Dealer and Partially Consolidated Rules


3915. Report to Dealer Member’s board of directors
         (1)     At least annually, the Chief Compliance Officer must provide a written report to the Dealer
                 Member’s board of directors for the purpose of assessing compliance by the Dealer Member, and
                 its employees and Approved Persons, with Corporation requirements and securities laws, other
                 than those required under subsection 3915(2).
         (2)     At least annually, the Chief Financial Officer must provide a written report to the Dealer
                 Member’s board of directors for the purpose of assessing compliance by the Dealer Member, and
                 its employees and Approved Persons, with the financial Corporation requirements and securities
                 laws, as necessary.
         (3)     The Dealer Member’s board of directors must review the reports and recommendations
                 submitted to it pursuant to section 3915 to determine the appropriate action to be taken to
                 remedy any compliance deficiencies that are identified and must ensure that such action is taken.
         (4)     The Dealer Member’s board of directors must maintain records of the actions it determines
                 necessary to correct compliance problems and the monitoring done to ensure that the actions
                 are carried out.
3916. Governance document
         (1)     A Dealer Member must file with the Corporation:
                 (i)     a copy of a current governance document that sets out the organizational structure and
                         reporting relationships required under Rule 3900, and
                 (ii)    notice of any material changes to the organizational structure and reporting relationships
                         set out in the governance document.
3917. Annual supervisory review of financial and operational policies and procedures
         (1)     A Dealer Member must ensure that a supervisory review of its financial and operational policies
                 and procedures is completed at least annually and that any deficiencies are identified and
                 corrected.
3918. Supervision of shared office premises
         (1)     A Dealer Member must have policies and procedures that specifically address the supervision of
                 shared office premises, as contemplated by section 2216, to provide reasonable assurance:
                 (i)     compliance with Corporation requirements, and
                 (ii)    the client has a clear understanding of which entity they are dealing with.
         (2)     A Dealer Member must have:
                 (i)     adequate supervisory resources to implement its policies and procedures,
                 (ii)    a system for communicating Corporation requirements relating to employees and Approved
                         Persons at the shared office premises, and
                 (iii)   a process providing reasonable assurance that Corporation requirements relating to shared
                         office premises are understood and implemented.
3919. – 3924. Reserved.




Series 3000 | Business Conduct and Client Accounts Rules                                                     Rule 3900
                                                             Investment Dealer and Partially Consolidated Rules


PART B – SUPERVISION OF ALL ACCOUNTS
3925. Supervision by designated persons
         (1)     A Dealer Member must effectively supervise account activity and must take reasonable steps to
                 provide reasonable assurance of compliance with Corporation requirements, securities laws and
                 applicable laws.
         (2)     A Dealer Member must designate one or more Supervisors to be responsible for approving the
                 opening of new accounts and for establishing and maintaining procedures relating to account
                 supervision and supervising account activity, in accordance with Corporation requirements.
         (3)     The designated Supervisor must be familiar with applicable Corporation requirements, securities
                 laws and applicable laws and the Dealer Member’s policies and procedures.
         (4)     A Dealer Member must appoint one or more alternate Supervisors as required, to the Supervisors
                 designated in subsection 3925(2), to supervise the Dealer Member’s business and to assume the
                 responsibility of the designated Supervisor in their absence.
3926. Account supervision policies and procedures
         (1)     A Dealer Member’s policies and procedures must specifically address account supervision, which
                 includes its standards for the review and supervision of account activity.
         (2)     A Dealer Member’s policies and procedures must specifically address the Dealer Member’s
                 obligations to:
                 (i)     identify clients that present a high risk to the Dealer Member,
                 (ii)    identify clients that present a high risk of conducting improper activities in the securities
                         markets, and
                 (iii)   comply with all anti-money laundering and terrorist financing requirements under
                         applicable laws.
         (3)     All policies and procedures relating to the supervision of accounts held at a Dealer Member and
                 any substantive amendments to such policies and procedures, must be approved by the Dealer
                 Member’s Chief Compliance Officer or another appropriate Executive.
         (4)     A Dealer Member must provide all supervisory staff with written:
                 (i)     procedures to be followed in reviewing account activity, and
                 (ii)    confirmation of the Dealer Member’s expectations of supervisory staff, with respect to
                         their supervisory roles and responsibilities.
         (5)     A Dealer Member’s policies and procedures must include controls for accessing and amending
                 client records.
         (6)     A Dealer Member must periodically review the policies and procedures used at its head office and
                 its branch offices to provide reasonable assurance the policies and procedures continue to be
                 effective and reflect current legislative and regulatory requirements, as well as industry practices.
3927. Reviews of account activity
         (1)     A Dealer Member must review account activity as required by Corporation requirements and
                 must take reasonable steps to provide reasonable assurance that account activity complies with




Series 3000 | Business Conduct and Client Accounts Rules                                                          Rule 3900
                                                             Investment Dealer and Partially Consolidated Rules


                 Corporation requirements, securities laws and other applicable laws and the Dealer Member’s
                 policies and procedures.
         (2)     A Dealer Member must record and keep evidence of completed supervisory reviews, including
                 details of inquiries about issues and their resolution, for the period required in section 3803.
         (3)     A Dealer Member must establish and follow procedures for the implementation of additional
                 supervisory measures applicable to Approved Persons with a history of regulatory infractions or
                 questionable conduct.
3928. – 3944. Reserved.

PART C – SUPERVISION OF RETAIL CLIENT ACCOUNTS
3945. Daily and monthly trade supervision
         (1)     A Dealer Member that has retail client accounts must have policies and procedures that
                 specifically address daily and monthly supervision of trading activity in retail client accounts.
                 These policies and procedures must outline actions to deal with problems or issues identified by
                 the review.
         (2)     In addition to meeting the Dealer Member’s general supervisory obligations and any relevant
                 obligations relating to trading, the policies and procedures relating to the supervision of retail
                 client accounts must specifically address the detection of:
                 (i)     unsuitable trading,
                 (ii)    undue concentration of securities, derivatives or precious metals bullion in a single account
                         or across accounts,
                 (iii)   excessive trading,
                 (iv)    trading in restricted securities or transacting in derivatives whose underlying interest is a
                         restricted security,
                 (v)     conflict of interest between Registered Representative, Investment Representative,
                         Portfolio Manager and Associate Portfolio Manager and client trading activity,
                 (vi)    excessive transaction transfers and trade cancellations indicating possible unauthorized
                         trading,
                 (vii) inappropriate or high risk trading strategies,
                 (viii) deterioration of the quality of client holdings in an account,
                 (ix)    excessive or improper crosses of securities, derivatives or precious metals bullion between
                         clients,
                 (x)     improper or excessive employee trading,
                 (xi)    front running,
                 (xii) account number changes,
                 (xiii) late payment,
                 (xiv) outstanding margin calls,
                 (xv) undisclosed short sales,
                 (xvi) manipulative and deceptive activities, and




Series 3000 | Business Conduct and Client Accounts Rules                                                         Rule 3900
                                                             Investment Dealer and Partially Consolidated Rules


                 (xvii) insider trading.
         (3)     The Dealer Member must develop policies and procedures that specifically address supervising
                 retail client accounts where a commission is not charged for trades placed by or for a client, such
                 as fee based accounts. These policies and procedures must:
                 (i)     address account activity review Corporation requirements, and
                 (ii)    use criteria other than commission levels.
         (4)     The Dealer Member must specifically designate the following retail client accounts for supervision
                 purposes:
                 (i)     non-client accounts,
                 (ii)    discretionary accounts,
                 (iii)   managed accounts,
                 (iv)    registered accounts, and
                 (v)     restricted accounts.
3946. Additional supervisory responsibilities
         (1)     In addition to transactional activity, the Dealer Member’s policies and procedures must
                 specifically address identifying, dealing with and informing the appropriate Supervisors of other
                 client related matters, including:
                 (i)     client complaints,
                 (ii)    cash account violations,
                 (iii)   transfers of funds and positions between unrelated accounts or between non-client
                         accounts and client accounts or deposits from non-client accounts to client accounts, and
                 (iv)    trading while the account is under margined.
3947. Supervision of new Registered Representatives and Investment Representatives
         (1)     A Dealer Member must closely supervise Registered Representatives and Investment
                 Representatives dealing with retail clients for six months after approval, as set out in the
                 Registered Representative / Investment Representative Monthly Supervision Report.
         (2)     Subsection 3947(1) does not apply if:
                 (i)     the Registered Representative was previously approved, for six months or more, to advise
                         on trades for retail clients for a securities firm that is a member of a SRO or a recognized
                         foreign regulatory organization, or
                 (ii)    the Investment Representative was previously approved for six months or more to advise
                         on trades or to trade for retail clients for a securities firm that is a member of a SRO or a
                         recognized foreign regulatory organization.
          (3)    A Dealer Member must complete and keep a copy of every Registered Representative /
                 Investment Representative Monthly Supervision Report for the Corporation’s inspection.
3948. Supervision of suitability determination obligations
         (1)     A Dealer Member must supervise each Registered Representative, Investment Representative,
                 Portfolio Manager and Associate Portfolio Manager to confirm that they are complying with their
                 responsibilities relating to the suitability determination to retail clients under Rule 3400.


Series 3000 | Business Conduct and Client Accounts Rules                                                         Rule 3900
                                                              Investment Dealer and Partially Consolidated Rules


3949. Reserved.

PART D – SUPERVISION OF INSTITUTIONAL CLIENT ACCOUNTS
3950. Supervisory policies and procedures for institutional client accounts
         (1)     A Dealer Member that offers institutional client accounts must have policies and procedures that
                 specifically address the supervision and review of trading activity in institutional clients’ accounts.
                 These policies and procedures must outline the actions to deal with problems or issues identified
                 from supervisory reviews.
         (2)     In addition to meeting the Dealer Member’s general supervisory obligations, including any
                 relevant obligations relating to trading in securities, derivatives and precious metals bullion and
                 the policies and procedures relating to the supervision of institutional client accounts must
                 specifically address detecting improper or suspicious account activity including:
                 (i)      manipulative and deceptive activities,
                 (ii)     trading in securities on the Dealer Member’s restricted list,
                 (iii) transacting in derivatives whose underlying interest is on the Dealer Member’s restricted
                       list,
                 (iv) front running by employee or proprietary accounts,
                 (v)   trading in securities that have restrictions on their transfer,
                 (vi) transacting in derivatives whose underlying interest has restrictions on their transfer, and
                 (vii) exceeding derivative position or exercise limits.
3951. Supervision of suitability determination obligations
         (1)     A Dealer Member must supervise each Registered Representative, Investment Representative,
                 Portfolio Manager and Associate Portfolio Manager to confirm their compliance with their
                 responsibilities relating to the suitability determination to institutional clients under section 3403.
3952. –3954. Reserved.

PART E – SUPERVISION OF ORDER EXECUTION ONLY ACCOUNTS
3955. Supervision of order execution only accounts
         (1)     A Dealer Member that is approved by the Corporation to provide order execution only accounts
                 within a separate legal entity or within a separate business unit must have policies and
                 procedures in place to:
                 (i)     meet the Dealer Member’s general supervisory obligations and any relevant obligations
                         relating to transacting in securities, derivatives and precious metals bullion,
                 (ii)    ensure that clients are not provided with recommendations as a result of the client having
                         an account with:
                         (a)      a separate legal entity of the Dealer Member,
                         (b)      a separate business unit of the Dealer Member, or
                         (c)      the Dealer Member itself, and
                 (iii)   to review customer trading and accounts for those concerns listed in Rule 3900, other than
                         those relating to the suitability requirements.



Series 3000 | Business Conduct and Client Accounts Rules                                                        Rule 3900
                                                             Investment Dealer and Partially Consolidated Rules


         (2)     The Dealer Member’s, or separate business unit of the Dealer Member, policies and procedures
                 relating to review of client trading must specifically address the risks associated with the method
                 of order entry and the absence of intermediation by employees of the Dealer Member.
         (3)     The Dealer Member or separate business unit of the Dealer Member must maintain an audit trail
                 of all supervisory reviews as required in Rule 3900.
          (4)     The Dealer Member or separate business unit of the Dealer Member must have sufficient
                  supervisory resources allocated at head office and branch levels to effectively implement the
                  supervisory procedures required under section 3955.
3956. – 3959. Reserved.

PART F – SUPERVISION OF DERIVATIVES ACCOUNTS
3960. Supervision of derivatives accounts
         (1)     A Dealer Member that transacts in or advises on derivatives must, where applicable:
                 (i)      appoint a designated Supervisor to supervise its activities that involve options contracts or
                          similar derivatives, and
                 (ii)     appoint a designated Supervisor to supervise its activities that involve futures contracts,
                          forward contracts, contracts for difference, futures contract options or similar derivatives.
         (2)     The designated Supervisors must have the qualifications and experience required to supervise the
                 Dealer Member’s derivatives activities.
         (3)     The Dealer Member must appoint one or more alternate Supervisors if necessary to ensure
                 continuous supervision of its derivatives activities.
         (4)     An alternate Supervisor must assume all or part of the designated Supervisor’s responsibilities if:
                 (i)      the relevant designated Supervisor is absent or unable to carry out their duties, or
                 (ii)    a Dealer Member’s trading activity requires additional qualified individuals to supervise the
                         Dealer Member's derivatives-related activities.
3961. Responsibility of designated Supervisors for derivatives accounts
         (1)     The designated Supervisors are responsible for:
                 (i)      approving new derivatives accounts, and
                 (ii)    ensuring that the handling of clients’ derivatives account trading complies with Corporation
                         requirements.
3962. Supervision of retail derivatives accounts
         (1)     The designated Supervisors for retail derivatives accounts are responsible for:
                 (i)      reviewing and approving client loss limits when they are set annually or updated, taking
                          into consideration previous losses,
                 (ii)     ensuring that all recommendations made for an account are and continue to be suitable
                          for the client; and
                 (iii)    put the client’s interest first.




Series 3000 | Business Conduct and Client Accounts Rules                                                         Rule 3900
                                                             Investment Dealer and Partially Consolidated Rules


         (2)     The Dealer Member must ensure that Registered Representatives, Investment Representatives,
                 Portfolio Managers and Associate Portfolio Managers only trade in or advise on those derivatives
                 included in their approval category.
         (3)     On a daily and monthly basis, the designated Supervisor must review all derivatives accounts that
                 are designated as discretionary accounts and managed accounts.
         (4)     The Dealer Member must have policies and procedures that specifically address notifying clients
                 of:
                 (i)      approaching expiry dates,
                 (ii)     significant changes in derivatives resulting from changes in the underlying interest,
                 (iii)    any changes in the Dealer Member’s business policy, and
                 (iv)     any new developments in the trading or regulation of derivatives that may impact clients.
         (5)     The Dealer Member must have policies and procedures that specifically:
                 (i)      require the designated Supervisor to approve the solicitation of clients to use derivatives
                          programs, as well as clients’ actual use of derivatives,
                 (ii)     prevent a client from transacting in derivatives without executing a derivatives trading
                          agreement with the Dealer Member,
                 (iii)    address the handling of futures contracts, forward contracts and similar derivatives with
                          pending delivery months,
                 (iv)     address detection of derivatives trading by a client who is an insider of a reporting issuer or
                          any other issuer whose securities are publicly traded to avoid insider trading restrictions,
                 (v)      prevent a retail client from holding contracts for difference or similar derivatives positions
                          representing more than 0.5% of the float of a reporting issuer or any other issuer whose
                          securities are publicly traded on an intra day or short term basis, and
         (vi)    prohibit the offering of contracts for difference or similar derivatives to a retail client that confer
                 the right or obligation to acquire or deliver the underlying interest or confer any other rights of
                 shareholders, such as voting rights.
3963. Supervision of retail derivatives account trading activity
         (1)     In addition to Corporation requirements relating to account supervision, the Dealer Member’s
                 policies and procedures must specifically address the review of derivative transactions to detect
                 the following:
                 (i)      excessive intra-day and short-term transactions,
                 (ii)     transacting while the account is under-margined,
                 (iii)    transacting beyond margin or credit limits,
                 (iv)     cumulative losses exceeding approved client loss limits in accounts determined in
                          accordance with clause 3252(1)(vii) and subsection 3252(2),
                 (v)      exceeding derivative position or exercise limits,
                 (vi)     speculative transactions in hedging accounts,
                 (vii)    transactions in derivatives whose underlying interest is on the Dealer Member’s restricted
                          list,



Series 3000 | Business Conduct and Client Accounts Rules                                                          Rule 3900
                                                              Investment Dealer and Partially Consolidated Rules


                 (viii) transactions in derivatives whose underlying interest has restrictions on their transfer,
                 (ix)     transacting in derivatives to avoid insider trading restrictions,
                 (x)      exposures arising out of uncovered option positions, and
                 (xi)     exposures to delivery obligations through the holding of futures contracts, forward
                          contracts and similar derivatives into the delivery month.
         (2)     Accounts must be selected for review using criteria that provides reasonable assurance of
                 detecting improper trading activity.
3964. Access to Approved Persons qualified in derivatives
         (1)     The Dealer Member’s policies and procedures must specifically address that derivatives clients
                 have access, during normal business hours, to a Registered Representative, Investment
                 Representative, Portfolio Manager or Associate Portfolio Manager qualified to deal in, where
                 applicable:
                 (i)      options contracts and similar derivatives, or
                 (ii)     futures contracts, forward contracts, contracts for difference, futures contract options or
                          similar derivatives, or
                 (iii)    all derivatives.
3965. - 3969. Reserved.

PART G –SUPERVISION OF DISCRETIONARY ACCOUNTS AND MANAGED ACCOUNTS
3970. Supervision for discretionary accounts
         (1)     In addition to Corporation requirements relating to account supervision, the designated
                 Supervisor responsible for discretionary accounts must also review the financial performance of
                 each discretionary account at least monthly.
         (2)     As part of the review in subsection 3970(1), the designated Supervisor must also review
                 discretionary accounts to determine if the Registered Representative, authorized to affect trades
                 for the discretionary account should continue to do so, based on the designated Supervisor’s
                 assessment of the discretionary account’s financial performance.
         (3)     The designated Supervisor responsible for discretionary accounts must not delegate the
                 performance of the reviews required in subsections 3970(1) and 3970(2) to any other person.
         (4)     A designated Supervisor must review any discretionary order initiated in a discretionary account
                 by a Registered Representative prior to the order being entered unless:
                 (i)     the Registered Representative has been approved as a Portfolio Manager, or
                 (ii)    the Registered Representative is also an Executive, and
                 (iii)   the designated Supervisor reviews the order no later than one business day after the trade
                         was made.
         (5)     A designated Supervisor must review any discretionary order initiated for a discretionary account
                 by an Executive who is approved as a Portfolio Manager, no later than the day after the trade was
                 made.




Series 3000 | Business Conduct and Client Accounts Rules                                                        Rule 3900
                                                           Investment Dealer and Partially Consolidated Rules


3971. Supervision of managed accounts
         (1)     A Dealer Member that has managed accounts must:
                 (i)     designate a Supervisor to be responsible for the supervision of managed accounts, and
                 (ii)    have policies and procedures that specifically address the supervision of individuals
                         responsible for handling managed accounts to provide reasonable assurance of compliance
                         with Corporation requirements.
         (2)     In addition to meeting the Dealer Member’s general supervisory obligations and any relevant
                 obligations relating to trading in securities, derivatives and precious metals bullion, the Dealer
                 Member’s policies and procedures dealing with the supervision of managed accounts must
                 specifically address:
                 (i)     identifying when a Portfolio Manager or sub-adviser, as described in section 3279, has
                         contravened managed account conflict of interest related requirements set out in section
                         3280, and
                 (ii)    ensuring fairness in the allocation of investment opportunities among its managed
                         accounts.
         (3)     The Dealer Member’s policies and procedures dealing with the supervision of managed accounts
                 must specifically address the direct supervision of any Associate Portfolio Manager that provides
                 discretionary management to managed accounts, including a prohibition on the Associate
                 Portfolio Manager providing advice unless the advice has been approved by a Portfolio Manager
                 at the Dealer Member prior to the Associate Portfolio Manager providing the advice.
         (4)     Supervision of the Associate Portfolio Manager must be conducted by:
                 (i)     a Portfolio Manager at the Dealer Member or another Dealer Member who is authorized to
                         provide discretionary management to managed accounts and who is not in the period of
                         close supervision, or
                 (ii)    a person registered as an advisor under securities laws who has entered into a contract
                         with the Dealer Member to provide the supervision.
3972. Managed account committee
         (1)     A Dealer Member that has managed accounts must establish a managed account committee that
                 includes at least one designated Supervisor responsible for managed accounts and the Chief
                 Compliance Officer. The committee must, at least annually:
                 (i)     review the Dealer Member’s policies and procedures dealing with the supervision of
                         managed accounts, and
                 (ii)    recommend to senior management appropriate actions necessary to achieve compliance
                         with Corporation requirements and securities laws, applicable to managed accounts.
3973. Managed account review
         (1)     In addition to Corporation requirements relating to account supervision, the designated
                 Supervisor under clause 3970(1)(i) must review each managed account quarterly to provide
                 reasonable assurance that:
                 (i)     the client’s investment objectives are being pursued, and
                 (ii)    the handling of each of the managed accounts complies with Corporation requirements.


Series 3000 | Business Conduct and Client Accounts Rules                                                       Rule 3900
                                                           Investment Dealer and Partially Consolidated Rules


         (2)     If the investment decisions for a managed account are made centrally and apply to a number of
                 managed accounts, the quarterly review may be done at an aggregate level, subject to minor
                 variations to allow for client directed investment restrictions and the timing of client cash flows
                 into the managed account.
3974. – 3999. Reserved.




Series 3000 | Business Conduct and Client Accounts Rules                                                      Rule 3900
                                                              Investment Dealer and Partially Consolidated Rules


SERIES 4000 | DEALER MEMBER FINANCIAL AND OPERATIONAL RULES

RULE 4100 | GENERAL DEALER MEMBER FINANCIAL STANDARDS – MINIMUM CAPITAL,
EARLY WARNING, FINANCIAL REPORTS AND AUDITORS

4101. Introduction
         (1)     Rule 4100 sets out the following Dealer Member general financial requirements:
                 Part A - Minimum capital level and related requirements
                            [sections 4110 through 4119]
                 Part B - Early warning tests and related requirements
                            [sections 4130 through 4138]
                 Part C - Regulatory financial report filing requirements
                            [sections 4150 through 4153]
                 Part D - Appointment of auditors and audit requirements
                            [sections 4170 through 4192]
4102. - 4109. Reserved.

PART A - MINIMUM CAPITAL LEVEL AND RELATED REQUIREMENTS
4110. Introduction
         (1)     Part A of Rule 4100 sets out general Corporation requirements for:
                 (i)     maintaining at all times a positive risk adjusted capital amount,
                 (ii)    averting, reporting and remedying any negative risk adjusted capital situations,
                 (iii)   calculating its current risk adjusted capital amount,
                 (iv)    maintaining and utilizing a capital adequacy reporting system, and
                 (v)     consolidating its financial position reporting with related companies.
4111. Maintaining a positive risk adjusted capital amount
         (1)     A Dealer Member must at all times maintain a risk adjusted capital amount of greater than zero.
4112. Negative risk adjusted capital and other early warning test failure situations
         (1)     The Chief Financial Officer and Ultimate Designated Person must take prompt action to:
                 (i)     avert or remedy any projected or actual negative risk adjusted capital situations,
                 (ii)    report to the Corporation any actual negative risk adjusted capital situations,
                 (iii)   report to the Corporation any early warning test failure situations that could require the
                         Dealer Member to be designated in early warning level 1 or level 2, and
                 (iv)    report to the Corporation any circumstances from which it should be apparent that there
                         would be early warning test failures that could require the Dealer Member to be
                         designated in early warning level 1 or level 2 if the Dealer Member had complied with the
                         requirements of Rule 4100 and performed the early warning test calculations.



Series 4000 | Dealer Member Financial and Operational Rules                                                    Rule 4100
                                                              Investment Dealer and Partially Consolidated Rules

4113. Calculating current risk adjusted capital amount - general requirements
         (1)     A Dealer Member must calculate its risk adjusted capital amount according to the requirements
                 specified in Form 1 and any other Corporation requirements.
         (2)     A Dealer Member must know its current risk adjusted capital amount by computing it as often as
                 necessary to ensure it has adequate regulatory capital at all times. The Dealer Member must also
                 comply with weekly, monthly and annual calculation and documentation requirements in Rule
                 4100.
4114. Calculating current capital position - weekly documentation
         (1)     At least weekly, but more frequently if required (for instance, the Dealer Member is close to
                 violating an early warning test or volatile market conditions exist), the Chief Financial Officer or
                 designate must document that he or she has:
                 (i)     received management reports produced by the Dealer Member’s accounting system
                         showing information relevant to estimating the Dealer Member’s risk adjusted capital
                         amount,
                 (ii)    obtained other information about items that, while perhaps not yet recorded in the
                         accounting system, are likely to significantly affect the Dealer Member’s risk adjusted
                         capital amount (for instance, bad and doubtful debts, unreconciled positions, underwriting
                         and inventory commitments and margin requirements),
                 (iii)   calculated the Dealer Member’s risk adjusted capital amount, compared it to planned and
                         prior period capital levels, and reported adverse trends or variances to the Ultimate
                         Designated Person,
                 (iv)    performed the early warning liquidity and capital test calculations for the Dealer Member
                         and determined whether or not the Dealer Member has or may have violated any of these
                         tests, and
                 (v)     performed the early warning profitability test calculations for the Dealer Member where
                         the Dealer Member has experienced a significant month-to-date loss, and determined
                         whether or not the Dealer Member has or may have violated this test.
4115. Calculating current capital position - monthly documentation and reconciliation
         (1)     A Dealer Member must generate monthly trial balances and prepare regulatory capital
                 computations based on its current ledger accounts to:
                 (i)     check on status and accuracy of those ledger accounts, and
                 (ii)    keep itself informed of its risk adjusted capital amount as required under Part A of
                         Rule 4100.
         (2)     The Chief Financial Officer or designate must document that he or she has at least monthly,
                 performed the early warning liquidity, capital and profitability test calculations for the Dealer
                 Member and determined whether or not the Dealer Member has violated this test.
         (3)     The preliminary month-end estimate of the Dealer Member’s risk adjusted capital amount must
                 be reconciled to the final risk adjusted capital amount reported as part of the Dealer Member’s
                 monthly financial report. Material discrepancies must be investigated and steps taken to avoid
                 re-occurrence.

Series 4000 | Dealer Member Financial and Operational Rules                                                     Rule 4100
                                                               Investment Dealer and Partially Consolidated Rules

4116. Dealer Member capital adequacy reporting system - adequate policies and procedures
         (1)     A Dealer Member must:
                 (i)     have policies and procedures that specifically address timely, complete and accurate
                         records,
                 (ii)    maintain a capital adequacy reporting system:
                         (a)     based on timely, complete and accurate accounting records,
                         (b)     that reflects projected capital requirements resulting from current and planned
                                 business activities in each of its major functional areas (for instance, capital markets,
                                 principal trading, borrowing/lending),
                         (c)     that includes senior management approved capital usage limits for each of these
                                 functional areas that provides for reasonable assurance its combined operations
                                 maintain adequate intra-day and end of day risk adjusted capital amounts, and
                         (d)     that identifies and informs senior management of breaches of approved capital usage
                                 limits. The Chief Financial Officer is responsible for identifying any breaches and
                                 reporting them to the Dealer Member’s appropriate Executives,
                 (iii)   monitor and act on information produced by its capital adequacy reporting system so that
                         it maintains at all times a positive risk adjusted capital amount as prescribed by Corporation
                         requirements,
                 (iv)    identify and implement changes, on an ongoing basis, to its capital adequacy reporting
                         system required to reflect developments in its business or in regulatory requirements, and
                 (v)     perform and document, at least annually, a supervisory review of its capital adequacy
                         reporting system.
         (2)     A Dealer Member’s Chief Financial Officer must continuously monitor the Dealer Member’s risk
                 adjusted capital amount to ensure that the Dealer Member maintains at all times a positive risk
                 adjusted capital amount as prescribed by Corporation requirements.
4117. Consolidation of financial position with related companies
         (1)     In calculating its risk adjusted capital, a Dealer Member may consolidate its financial position with
                 the financial position of any of its related companies if:
                 (i)     the Corporation has provided the Dealer Member with prior written approval of the
                         consolidation,
                 (ii)    the Dealer Member has guaranteed the obligations of the related company and the related
                         company has guaranteed the obligations of the Dealer Member,
                 (iii)   the guarantees are:
                         (a)     in a form acceptable to the Corporation, and
                         (b)     unlimited in amount,
                         and
                 (iv)    the consolidation meets the requirements in subsection 4117(2).
         (2)     A Dealer Member consolidating its financial position with a related company under subsection
                 4117(1) must comply with the following requirements or with other requirements acceptable to
                 the Corporation:

Series 4000 | Dealer Member Financial and Operational Rules                                                        Rule 4100
                                                                  Investment Dealer and Partially Consolidated Rules

                 (i)     eliminate inter-company accounts between the Dealer Member and the related company,
                 (ii)    eliminate any minority interests in the related company from the Dealer Member’s capital
                         calculation, and
                 (iii)   combine Dealer Member and related company financial information prepared as at the
                         same date.
4118. Options for calculating risk adjusted capital available to well-capitalized Dealer Members
         (1)     A Dealer Member, whose risk adjusted capital, early warning excess and early warning reserve
                 amounts are substantially in excess of that required under Corporation requirements, may apply
                 requirements more stringent than the Corporation capital computation requirements and
                 thereby omit certain documentation in support of the computation. For example, when
                 calculating risk adjusted capital:
                 (i)     inventories can be grouped into broader margin categories and maximum margin rates
                         applied,
                 (ii)    margin requirement reductions for offset positions recognized elsewhere in Corporation
                         requirements can be ignored, and
                 (iii)   assets partly allowable or of questionable value can be excluded entirely.
4119. Dealer Member guarantees
         (1)     Any guarantee provided by a Dealer Member must be of a fixed or determinable amount, unless
                 the guarantee is given to a related company in accordance with section 2206.
4120. - 4129. Reserved.

PART B - EARLY WARNING TESTS AND RELATED REQUIREMENTS
4130. Introduction
         (1)     Part B of Rule 4100 describes the early warning system that alerts the Corporation to a Dealer
                 Member’s financial or operational problems. It also sets out the process the Corporation follows
                 and the requirements that Dealer Members must comply with to resolve early warning test
                 violation situations before they worsen.
         (2)     A Dealer Member has a responsibility to:
                 (i)     monitor for early warning test violations,
                 (ii)    avoid the potential for early warning test violations, and
                 (iii)   report early warning test violations to the Corporation when they occur.
4131. Definitions
         (1)     The following terms have the meaning set out below when used in Part B of Rule 4100:
                  “average monthly loss”          The sum of the Dealer Member’s monthly profit and loss amounts for a
                                                  particular period divided by the number of months in the period and the result
                                                  is a loss.
                  “early warning test             The Dealer Member has failed an early warning test as set out in Schedules 13
                  violation”                      and 13A of Form 1.



Series 4000 | Dealer Member Financial and Operational Rules                                                             Rule 4100
                                                                    Investment Dealer and Partially Consolidated Rules

                  “loss”                          The Dealer Member’s loss, if any, for early warning test purposes as set out in
                                                  Statement E of Form 1.
                  “profit”                        The Dealer Member’s profit, if any, for early warning test purposes as set out in
                                                  Statement E of Form 1.

4132. Early warning designation, levels and tests
         (1)     A Dealer Member is designated as being in early warning level 1 or level 2 if at any time it has
                 violated any one of the following tests:
                  Early warning tests                         Early warning                                 Early warning
                                                                 level 1                                        level 2
                  Liquidity test                Dealer Member’s early warning                 Dealer Member’s early warning excess
                                                reserve is less than zero.                    is less than zero.
                  Capital test                  Dealer Member’s risk adjusted capital         Dealer Member’s risk adjusted capital is
                                                is less than five per cent of its total       less than two per cent of its total
                                                margin required.                              margin required.
                  Profitability test #1         Dealer Member’s current month risk            Dealer Member’s current month risk
                                                adjusted capital is less than six times       adjusted capital is less than three times
                                                but greater than or equal to three            the absolute value of its average
                                                times the absolute value of its average       monthly loss, if any, for the six-month
                                                monthly loss, if any, for the six-month       period ending with the current month,
                                                period ending with the current month,         and
                                                and                                           Dealer Member’s preceding month risk
                                                Dealer Member’s preceding month risk          adjusted capital is less than six times
                                                adjusted capital is less than six times       the absolute value of its average
                                                the absolute value of its average             monthly loss, if any, for the six-month
                                                monthly loss, if any, for the six-month       period ending with the preceding
                                                period ending with the preceding              month.
                                                month.

                  Profitability test #2         Dealer Member’s current month risk            Dealer Member’s current month risk
                                                adjusted capital is less than six times       adjusted capital is less than three times
                                                the absolute value of its loss, if any, for   the absolute value of its loss, if any, for
                                                the current month.                            the current month.

                  Profitability test #3         Not applicable                                Dealer Member’s current month risk
                                                                                              adjusted capital is less than the
                                                                                              absolute value of its loss, if any, for the
                                                                                              three month period ending with the
                                                                                              current month.
                  Frequency                     Not applicable                                Dealer Member has been designated as
                                                                                              being in any early warning, excluding
                                                                                              discretionary early warnings, three or
                                                                                              more times in the preceding six
                                                                                              months, or


Series 4000 | Dealer Member Financial and Operational Rules                                                                      Rule 4100
                                                                    Investment Dealer and Partially Consolidated Rules


                  Early warning tests                         Early warning                                Early warning
                                                                  level 1                                     level 2
                                                                                             Dealer Member has failed an early
                                                                                             warning level 1 profitability test and at
                                                                                             the same time has also failed either an
                                                                                             early warning level 1 liquidity or capital
                                                                                             test.

4133. Early warning related requirements
         (1)     When a Dealer Member has been designated as being in early warning level 1 or level 2, because
                 of an early warning test violation under section 4132, the following actions must be taken:
                                                              Early warning                                Early warning
                                                                  level 1                                      level 2

                  Notifying the                  The Dealer Member’s Ultimate                The Dealer Member’s Ultimate
                  Corporation in writing         Designated Person and Chief Financial       Designated Person and Chief Financial
                                                 Officer must immediately deliver a          Officer must immediately deliver a
                                                 letter to the Corporation detailing:        letter to the Corporation detailing:
                                                 (i) the early warning tests in section      (i) the early warning tests in section
                                                     4132 that have been violated,               4132 that have been violated,
                                                 (ii) the identified problems that           (ii) the identified problems that
                                                      resulted in the test violation,             resulted in the test violation,
                                                 (iii) the Dealer Member’s proposed          (iii) the Dealer Member’s proposed
                                                       plan to rectify the problems                plan to rectify the problems
                                                       identified, and                             identified, and
                                                 (iv) the Dealer Member’s                    (iv) the Dealer Member’s
                                                      acknowledgement that it is in               acknowledgement that it is in early
                                                      early warning level 1 and that the          warning level 2 and that the
                                                      restrictions in section 4135 apply.         restrictions in section 4135 apply.
                                                 The Dealer Member must send a copy          The Dealer Member must send a copy
                                                 of the notification letter to its auditor   of the notification letter to its auditor
                                                 and the Canadian Investor Protection        and the Canadian Investor Protection
                                                 Fund.                                       Fund.
                  Meeting with the               Not applicable                              The Dealer Member’s Ultimate
                  Corporation                                                                Designated Person and Chief Financial
                                                                                             Officer must meet with the Corporation
                                                                                             to present the Dealer Member’s plan
                                                                                             for rectifying the identified problems.

                  Taking required actions The Dealer Member must:                            The Dealer Member must:
                                                 (i) file a monthly financial report         (i) file a weekly capital report with the
                                                     required under section 4151                 same information as a monthly
                                                     within 15 business days after the           financial report within five business
                                                     end of each month or on any                 days after the end of each week or


Series 4000 | Dealer Member Financial and Operational Rules                                                                    Rule 4100
                                                                    Investment Dealer and Partially Consolidated Rules


                                                              Early warning                              Early warning
                                                                  level 1                                   level 2
                                                      earlier day that the Corporation         on any earlier day that the
                                                      considers practicable,                   Corporation considers practicable,
                                                 (ii) provide any other information        (ii) file a weekly report, in a
                                                      that the Corporation requests,            Corporation prescribed form, of its
                                                      and                                       aged segregation deficiencies and
                                                 (iii) comply with the business                 an outline of its plan to correct
                                                       restrictions in section 4135.            them according to sections 4321
                                                                                                through 4326,
                                                                                           (iii) file a business plan for such period
                                                                                                 and covering such matters as the
                                                                                                 Corporation specifies,
                                                                                           (iv) file its next monthly financial
                                                                                                report required under section 4151
                                                                                                within 10 business days after the
                                                                                                end of each month or any earlier
                                                                                                day that the Corporation considers
                                                                                                practicable,
                                                                                           (v) provide any other information that
                                                                                               the Corporation requests, and
                                                                                           (vi) comply with the business
                                                                                                restrictions in section 4135.

                  Responding to the              The Corporation will send a letter to a   The Corporation will send a letter to a
                  Corporation’s letter           Dealer Member in early warning level      Dealer Member in early warning level 2
                                                 1 confirming that the Dealer Member       confirming that the Dealer Member has
                                                 has been designated as being in early     been designated as being in early
                                                 warning level 1 and requesting            warning level 2 and requesting
                                                 information from the Dealer Member.       information from the Dealer Member.
                                                 A Dealer Member will respond to the       A Dealer Member will respond to the
                                                 Corporation’s early warning letter        Corporation’s early warning letter
                                                 within five business days:                within five business days:
                                                 (i) with the requested information,       (i) with the requested information, or
                                                     or                                    (ii) acknowledging it will submit the
                                                 (ii) acknowledging it will submit the          information promptly, and
                                                      information promptly, and            (iii) with an update on the Dealer
                                                 (iii) with an update on the Dealer              Member’s early warning situation if
                                                       Member’s early warning situation          any material circumstances have
                                                       if any material circumstances             changed.
                                                       have changed.                       The Dealer Member must send copies
                                                 The Dealer Member must send copies of its response letter to its auditor and
                                                 of its response letter to its auditor and the Canadian Investor Protection Fund.




Series 4000 | Dealer Member Financial and Operational Rules                                                                  Rule 4100
                                                                   Investment Dealer and Partially Consolidated Rules


                                                              Early warning                             Early warning
                                                                 level 1                                    level 2
                                                 the Canadian Investor Protection
                                                 Fund.
                  On-site reviewing of           The Corporation will as soon as           The Corporation will as soon as
                  the Dealer Member’s            practicable:                              practicable:
                  procedures                     (i) conduct an on-site review of the      (i) conduct an on-site review of the
                                                     Dealer Member’s procedures for            Dealer Member’s procedures for
                                                     monitoring capital on daily basis,        monitoring capital on daily basis,
                                                     and                                       and
                                                 (ii) prepare a report as to the results   (ii) prepare a report as to the results
                                                      of the review.                            of the review.

                  Reimbursing the                The Corporation may require a Dealer      The Corporation may require a Dealer
                  Corporation for costs          Member to pay reasonable costs and        Member to pay reasonable costs and
                                                 expenses incurred to administer the       expenses incurred to administer the
                                                 Dealer Member’s early warning             Dealer Member’s early warning
                                                 situation under Rule 4100.                situation under Rule 4100.

4134. Discretion to designate a Dealer Member as being in early warning
         (1)     The Corporation may designate a Dealer Member as being in early warning level 1 or 2, if at any
                 time, the condition of the Dealer Member is not satisfactory for any reason, including:
                 (i)     financial or operating difficulties,
                 (ii)    problems arising from a record-keeping conversion or significant changes in clearing
                         methods,
                 (iii)   issues related to being a new Dealer Member, or
                 (iv)    lateness in any filing or reporting required by the Corporation.
4135. Restrictions on a Dealer Member in early warning
         (1)     A Dealer Member designated as being in early warning level 1 or 2 must obtain the Corporation’s
                 written consent before:
                 (i)     reducing its capital in any way, including by share redemption, re-purchase or cancellation,
                 (ii)    reducing any of its Corporation approved subordinated indebtedness,
                 (iii)   incurring any direct or indirect loan, advance, bonus, dividend, capital or other payments or
                         distributions of assets to any Director, officer, partner, shareholder, related company,
                         affiliate or associate, or
                 (iv)    incurring any commitments to increase its non-allowable assets.
4136. Additional restrictions
         (1)     The Corporation may impose any of the following additional restrictions on a Dealer Member in
                 early warning:




Series 4000 | Dealer Member Financial and Operational Rules                                                                  Rule 4100
                                                                   Investment Dealer and Partially Consolidated Rules


                  Early warning level 1             Early warning level 2
                  None                              (i) Reducing the amount of clients’ free credit balances that the Dealer
                                                        Member or its carrying broker may use under Part C of Rule 4300, to an
                                                        amount the Corporation considers desirable.
                                                    (ii) Prohibiting the Dealer Member from opening new branch offices, hiring
                                                         any new Registered Representatives, Investment Representatives,
                                                         Portfolio Managers or Associate Portfolio Managers, opening any new
                                                         client accounts, or changing in any material way the Dealer Member’s
                                                         inventory positions.

         (2)     For the restrictions under early warning level 2 part (ii) of subsection 4136(1), the Corporation
                 must provide the Dealer Member with a written notice of the order imposing additional
                 restrictions on the Dealer Member.
         (3)     Review of early warning level 2 prohibitions
                 (i)     The Dealer Member may request a hearing panel review of a subsection 4136(2) order
                         within three business days after release of the decision.
                 (ii)    If a request for review is made, the hearing shall be held as soon as reasonably possible and
                         no later than 21 days after the request for review, unless otherwise agreed by the parties.
                         The hearing panel review shall be conducted in accordance with the requirements set out
                         in Rule 9300.
                 (iii)   If a Dealer Member does not request a review within the time period prescribed in clause
                         4136(3)(i), the subsection 4136(2) order becomes effective and final.
4137. Prohibited transactions
         (1)     A Dealer Member must not enter into any transaction that would cause the Dealer Member to be
                 in early warning unless it first notifies the Corporation in writing of its intention to do so and
                 receives the Corporation’s written approval.
4138. Lifting an early warning designation
         (1)     A Dealer Member will remain designated as being in early warning level 1 or 2 until the
                 Corporation confirms in writing that the early warning designation has been lifted. The
                 Corporation will lift the early warning designation when the Dealer Member files a monthly
                 financial report, or submits such other evidence or assurances, that satisfies the Corporation that
                 the Dealer Member has solved the problems that placed it in early warning.
4139. - 4149. Reserved.

PART C - REGULATORY FINANCIAL REPORT FILING REQUIREMENTS
4150. Introduction
         (1)     Part C of Rule 4100 sets out a Dealer Member’s financial reporting obligations. Financial reporting
                 enables the Corporation to monitor a Dealer Member’s financial position and compliance with
                 Corporation requirements relating to regulatory capital, as well as to receive an early indication of
                 any deterioration in that position.



Series 4000 | Dealer Member Financial and Operational Rules                                                             Rule 4100
                                                              Investment Dealer and Partially Consolidated Rules

4151. Dealer Member financial filings
         (1)     A Dealer Member must file:
                 (i)     an audited Form 1 for its fiscal year within seven weeks following year-end, and
                 (ii)    a monthly financial report for each calendar month within 20 business days following
                         month-end,
                 in accordance with Corporation requirements.
4152. Extending deadline for financial filings
         (1)     A Dealer Member may request an extension of time for filing its monthly financial report by
                 writing to the Corporation.
         (2)     A Dealer Member's auditor may request an extension of time for filing the Dealer Member’s
                 annual Form 1 by writing to the Corporation.
         (3)     The Corporation may grant an extension under subsections 4152(1) and 4152(2) if it considers the
                 request to be appropriate in the circumstances.
4153. Late filing fee
         (1)     A Dealer Member must pay a fee, even when an extension is granted, to the Corporation if it does
                 not file a document or information required under Part C of Rule 4100 within the time prescribed
                 by the Corporation.
4154. - 4169. Reserved.

PART D - APPOINTMENT OF AUDITORS AND AUDIT REQUIREMENTS
4170. Introduction
         (1)     Part D of Rule 4100 sets out the minimum requirements for the appointment of auditors and for
                 the conducting of audits. The audit requirements ensure that auditors test for specific financial
                 and regulatory compliance issues and report any breaches of rules or standards to the
                 Corporation.
4171. Approved auditors
         (1)     The Corporation annually approves, based on adopted criteria, a list of audit firms as panel
                 auditors eligible to perform the audit of the Dealer Member’s fiscal year Form 1 filing.
         (2)     The Corporation may remove an audit firm from the approved list if the audit firm no longer
                 meets the criteria referred to in subsection 4171(1).
4172. Dealer Member’s auditor
         (1)     A Dealer Member must use a Corporation approved auditor to perform the audit of the Dealer
                 Member’s fiscal year Form 1 filing.
4173. Responsibilities of a Dealer Member’s auditor
         (1)     The Dealer Member's auditor must:
                 (i)     conduct an audit of the Dealer Member’s fiscal year Form 1 filing, and



Series 4000 | Dealer Member Financial and Operational Rules                                                 Rule 4100
                                                              Investment Dealer and Partially Consolidated Rules

                 (ii)    carry out procedures of sufficient scope during the audit to enable the auditor to express
                         an opinion on the Dealer Member’s fiscal year Form 1 filing.
4174. No limitation on scope or procedures
         (1)     Nothing in Part D of Rule 4100:
                 (i)     limits the scope of the audit, or
                 (ii)    allows the Dealer Member's auditor to omit any additional audit procedure that it considers
                         necessary under the circumstances.
4175. Audit in accordance with Canadian Auditing Standards
         (1)     The Dealer Member's auditor must audit the Dealer Member’s fiscal year Form 1 filing in
                 accordance with Canadian Auditing Standards. The audit of a Dealer Member requires a
                 substantive approach and must include a review of the accounting system and the internal
                 controls for safeguarding assets.
                 The review must:
                 (i)     cover any in-house or service bureau electronic data processing operations, and
                 (ii)    where applicable, consider and include the appropriate report based on the Canadian
                         Standard on Assurance Engagements 3416, Reporting on Controls at a Service Organization.
         (2)     Although conducted in accordance with Canadian Auditing Standards, a Dealer Member’s
                 substantive audit procedures must be performed as at the fiscal year-end audit date and not as of
                 an earlier date.
         (3)     A Dealer Member’s risk adjusted capital and early warning reserve levels must be considered
                 when determining materiality for the Dealer Member’s audit.
4176. Test procedures as at the fiscal year-end date
         (1)     The Dealer Member's auditor must conduct the test procedures in sections 4177 through 4188 as
                 at the fiscal year-end date, which is the fiscal year-end audit date.
4177. Account for all securities, derivatives, precious metals bullion, currencies, and other like assets
         (1)     The Dealer Member's auditor must account for all securities, derivatives, precious metals bullion,
                 currencies and other like assets, including those held in safekeeping or in segregation, on hand, in
                 a vault, or otherwise in the Dealer Member’s physical possession.
         (2)     The Dealer Member's auditor must physically examine all assets in the Dealer Member’s physical
                 possession and compare them with the Dealer Member’s records.
         (3)     If a Dealer Member has employees who are independent of its employees who handle or record
                 securities, derivatives, precious metals bullion, currencies and other like assets, those
                 independent employees may conduct all or part of the count and examination under the
                 supervision of the Dealer Member's auditor.
         (4)     The Dealer Member's auditor must test count and compare sufficient security, derivative,
                 precious metals bullion, currency and other like asset counts with the independent employees’
                 counts, if applicable, and with the position records, to be satisfied that the entire count was
                 materially correct.


Series 4000 | Dealer Member Financial and Operational Rules                                                   Rule 4100
                                                              Investment Dealer and Partially Consolidated Rules

         (5)     The Dealer Member’s auditor must maintain control over the assets until the physical
                 examination has been completed.
4178. Verify securities in transfer and in transit
         (1)     On a test basis, the Dealer Member's auditor must verify positions in transfer and in transit
                 between the Dealer Member’s offices.
4179. Review the Dealer Member’s position balancing and account reconciliations
         (1)     The Dealer Member's auditor must review the Dealer Member’s:
                 (i)     balancing of all security, derivative and precious metals bullion positions,
                 (ii)    reconciliation of all broker, dealer, clearing account positions, and non-certificated
                         instrument positions the Dealer Member holds (in its inventory and for clients) with the
                         counterparty’s corresponding statements,
                 and
                 (iii)   reconciliation to ensure that all necessary adjustments identified during the preparation
                         have been made.
         (2)     If a position or account is not in balance according to the records (after adjusting to the physical
                 count):
                 (i)     the Dealer Member's auditor must find out whether the Dealer Member has adequately
                         provided for any potential loss, and
                 (ii)    the Dealer Member must make that provision according to the Notes and Instructions for
                         unresolved differences in Statement B of Form 1.
4180. Review bank reconciliations
         (1)     The Dealer Member's auditor must:
                 (i)     obtain bank statements, cancelled cheques, and all other debit and credit memos directly
                         from the Dealer Member’s banks which cover a period ending at least 10 business days
                         after the fiscal year-end audit date,
                 (ii)    verify the accuracy of the reconciliations between the bank statements and the ledger
                         control accounts as of the fiscal year-end audit date and on a test basis, using appropriate
                         audit procedures, and
                 (iii)   verify that all necessary adjustments identified during the preparation of the reconciliation
                         have been made.
4181. Review custodial agreements and approvals
         (1)     The Dealer Member's auditor must:
                 (i)     ensure that all custodial agreements in the form prescribed by the Corporation, are in place
                         for securities and precious metals bullion lodged with acceptable securities locations, and
                 (ii)    annually obtain evidence of a Dealer Member’s board of directors’ or authorized board
                         committee’s approval of other foreign acceptable securities locations. These approvals
                         must be documented in the meeting minutes.




Series 4000 | Dealer Member Financial and Operational Rules                                                    Rule 4100
                                                              Investment Dealer and Partially Consolidated Rules

4182. Obtain written positive confirmations
         (1)     The Dealer Member’s auditor must obtain written confirmation for all accounts and security,
                 precious metals bullion and derivative positions.
         (2)     The Dealer Member’s auditor must obtain written positive confirmation of:
                 (i)      all bank balances and other deposits including hypothecated securities,
                 (ii)     all money, and security, precious metals bullion and derivative positions, including with
                          clearing houses, similar organizations, and issuers of non-certificated instruments,
                 (iii)    all money and securities loaned or borrowed (including subordinated debt) and details of
                          collateral received or pledged, if any,
                 (iv)     a sample of accounts of, or with, brokers or dealers representing regular, joint, and
                          contractual commitment positions including money and security, precious metals bullion
                          and derivative positions,
                 (v)      all accounts of Directors and officers or partners, including money and security, precious
                          metals bullion and derivative positions,
                 (vi)     a sample of client, employee, and shareholder accounts, including money and security,
                          precious metals bullion and derivative positions,
                 (vii)    a sample of the guarantee and guarantor accounts, in cases where a margin reduction has
                          been taken in the accounts for which the guarantee has been provided during the year or
                          as at the end of the fiscal year,
                 (viii) statements from the Dealer Member's lawyers as to the status of lawsuits and other legal
                        matters pending which, if possible, should disclose an estimate of the extent of the
                        liabilities, and
                 (ix)    all other accounts which, in the opinion of the Dealer Member's auditor, should be
                         confirmed.
4183. Selection of accounts for positive confirmation
         (1)     For accounts in subsection 4182(2) the Dealer Member’s auditor:
                 (i)     must send a positive confirmation request,
                 (ii)    has the option to send a second positive confirmation request where a reply to the initial
                         request sent in clause 4183(1)(i) has not been received, and
                 (iii)   must use appropriate alternative verification procedures, to obtain relevant and reliable
                         audit evidence, where the second positive confirmation request in clause 4183(1)(ii) is not
                         sent or where a reply to second positive confirmation request has not been received.
         (2)     For accounts in clauses 4182(2)(iv), 4182(2)(vi), and 4182(2)(vii), the Dealer Member's auditor
                 must:
                 (i)     select specific accounts for positive confirmation based on:
                          (a)     account size (all accounts with net equity exceeding a certain dollar value, based on
                                  the level of materiality), and




Series 4000 | Dealer Member Financial and Operational Rules                                                     Rule 4100
                                                              Investment Dealer and Partially Consolidated Rules

                          (b)     other characteristics such as accounts in dispute, accounts that are significantly
                                  under margined, nominee accounts, and accounts that would require significant
                                  margin during the year or as at the fiscal year-end without an effective guarantee,
                 (ii)    select a sufficiently representative sample from all other accounts to provide reasonable
                         assurance that any material error will be detected, and
                 (iii)   send out negative confirmation requests for all remaining accounts that have not been
                         selected for positive confirmation. The negative confirmation request must include
                         instructions that any differences be reported directly to the auditor.
4184. Written confirmation of clients’ accounts with no balance
         (1)     The Dealer Member's auditor must, using positive or negative written confirmation procedures,
                 confirm on a test basis client accounts with no balance and client accounts closed since the last
                 fiscal year-end audit date. The Dealer Member's auditor must consider the adequacy of the
                 Dealer Member’s internal control system to decide the extent of these procedures.
4185. Effect on capital if no positive written confirmation received for a guarantee
         (1)     If the Dealer Member's auditor does not receive a reply to a positive confirmation request for
                 accounts within a guarantee arrangement made under clause 4182(2)(vii), the guarantee
                 agreement must not be accepted for margin reduction purposes for the accounts guaranteed
                 until:
                 (i)     the Dealer Member's auditor (or the Dealer Member, if after the Form 1 filing) receives
                         positive written confirmation of the guarantee arrangement, or
                 (ii)    the parties sign a new account guarantee agreement.
         (2)     If in response to a positive or negative confirmation request, a guarantor disputes the validity or
                 extent of the guarantee, that guarantee must not be accepted for margin reduction purposes
                 until:
                 (i)     the dispute is resolved, and
                 (ii)    the guarantor provides a confirmation of the account guarantee arrangement as set out in
                         clause 4185(1)(i) or 4185(1)(ii).
4186. Review a sample of signed guarantee agreements
         (1)     The Dealer Member's auditor must review a sample of the Dealer Member’s guarantee
                 agreements to ensure they are signed, completed, and comply with the minimum requirements
                 set out in subsection 5825(1).
4187. Tests and procedures on statements and schedules of Form 1
         (1)     The additional information set out in Part II of Form 1 should be subjected to the procedures in
                 the audit of Part I of Form 1, which are in accordance with Canadian Auditing Standards. No
                 procedures are required to be carried out in addition to those necessary to form an opinion on
                 Part I of Form 1.




Series 4000 | Dealer Member Financial and Operational Rules                                                     Rule 4100
                                                              Investment Dealer and Partially Consolidated Rules

4188. Test statements for a description of securities and precious metals bullion held in safekeeping
         (1)     The Dealer Member's auditor must check on a test basis whether the Dealer Member's position
                 record and client statements accurately describe the securities and precious metals bullion held
                 in safekeeping.
4189. Dealer Member obligations to auditor
         (1)     A Dealer Member must fully disclose all material facts and issues about its business and
                 operations that relate to the fairness of the regulatory financial statements, in a representation
                 letter from the Dealer Member’s appropriate Executives to the Dealer Member's auditor.
         (2)     A Dealer Member must provide its auditor with unrestricted access to all of the Dealer Member’s
                 records.
         (3)     A Dealer Member must not interfere with the audit process, nor conceal, withhold, or destroy any
                 records reasonably required for the audit.
4190. Calculations for Form 1 and other reporting
         (1)     The Dealer Member's auditor must perform the procedures identified in the “Agreed-upon
                 Procedures Report on compliance for insurance, segregation of securities, and
                 guarantee/guarantor relationships relied upon to reduce margin requirement during the year” in
                 Form 1 and report on the results as at the fiscal year-end audit date.
4191. Auditor’s records
         (1)     The Dealer Member's auditor must retain a final copy of Form 1 and all audit working papers for
                 six years.
         (2)     All audit working papers for the two most recent years must be readily accessible.
         (3)     The Dealer Member's auditor must make all working papers available for review by the
                 Corporation and the Investor Protection Fund.
4192. Auditor’s obligation to report to Corporation
         (1)     If during the regular conduct of an audit, the Dealer Member's auditor observes any material
                 breach of Corporation requirements related to:
                 (i)     calculating the Dealer Member's financial position,
                 (ii)    handling and custody of securities and precious metals bullion, or
                 (iii)   maintaining adequate records,
                 the Dealer Member's auditor must report that breach to the Corporation.
         (2)     The Dealer Member's auditor must report on any subsequent events, to date of filing, which have
                 had material adverse effect on the Dealer Member’s risk adjusted capital level.
4193. - 4199. Reserved.




Series 4000 | Dealer Member Financial and Operational Rules                                                  Rule 4100
                                                              Investment Dealer and Partially Consolidated Rules

RULE 4200 | GENERAL DEALER MEMBER FINANCIAL STANDARDS – DISCLOSURE, INTERNAL
CONTROLS, CALCULATIONS OF PRICES AND PROFESSIONAL OPINIONS

4201. Introduction
         (1)     Rule 4200 sets out the following Dealer Member general financial requirements:
                 Part A - Financial disclosure to clients
                            [sections 4202 through 4209]
                 Part B - General internal control requirements
                            [sections 4220 through 4225]
                 Part C - Pricing internal control requirements
                            [sections 4240 through 4244]
                 Part D - Calculation of prices on a yield basis
                            [sections 4260 through 4267]
                 Part E - Professional opinions
                            [sections 4270 through 4276]

PART A - FINANCIAL DISCLOSURE TO CLIENTS
4202. Introduction
         (1)     If a client so requests, a Dealer Member must disclose its financial position to the client to enable
                 them to assess the Dealer Member’s financial position. Part A of Rule 4200 sets out the
                 requirements that a Dealer Member must comply with in order to present this information to the
                 client in a complete and consistent manner.
4203. Summary statement of financial position available
         (1)     A Dealer Member must provide a summary statement of its financial position, when requested, to
                 any client who has traded in his or her account with the Dealer Member within the past 12
                 months.
         (2)     The summary statement of financial position must be as at the Dealer Member’s latest fiscal year-
                 end date and based on its latest annual audited financial statements.
         (3)     A Dealer Member must prepare the summary statement of financial position within 75 days of its
                 fiscal year-end.
4204. Summary statement of financial position - contents
         (1)     A Dealer Member’s summary statement of financial position must contain material information
                 including details of the Dealer Member’s assets, liabilities and financial statement capital, and be
                 generated using the Securities Industry Regulatory Financial Filings system.
4205. Audited or unaudited summary statement of financial position
         (1)     The summary statement of financial position must either be:
                 (i)     audited and accompanied by:



Series 4000 | Dealer Member Financial and Operational Rules                                                   Rule 4200
                                                              Investment Dealer and Partially Consolidated Rules

                         (a)     a report prepared by the Dealer Member’s auditor stating that it fairly summarizes
                                 the financial position of the Dealer Member, and
                         (b)     notes disclosures specified by the Dealer Member’s auditor,
                 or
                 (ii)    unaudited and:
                         (a)     generated from within the Securities Industry Regulatory Financial Filings system
                                 using information from the most recent audited Form 1of the Dealer Member,
                         (b)     certified by the Dealer Member’s Chief Financial Officer, and
                         (c)     accompanied by note disclosures that at a minimum describe, management’s
                                 responsibility for the summary statement of financial position, and the basis of
                                 accounting and restriction on the use of the summary statement of financial position.
4206. Publishing a summary statement of financial position
         (1)     If a Dealer Member publishes or circulates a summary statement of financial position in any
                 document, it must:
                 (i)     be in the same form, and
                 (ii)    contain the same information,
                 as the statement made available to the Dealer Member’s clients.
4207. List of current Executives and Directors
         (1)     A Dealer Member must provide a current list of its Executives and Directors, when requested, to
                 any client who has traded in his or her account with the Dealer Member within the past 12
                 months.
4208. Disclosures available to clients
         (1)     A Dealer Member must state on each account statement sent to clients, or in another manner the
                 Corporation approves, that:
                 (i)     its summary statement of financial position, and
                 (ii)    list of Executives and Directors,
                 are available on request to any client who has traded in his or her account within the previous 12
                 months.
4209. Consolidated financial statements - similar named entity
         (1)     A Dealer Member must disclose its financial statements separately from those of any affiliate or
                 holding company with a similar name.
         (2)     If a Dealer Member’s accounts are included in the consolidated financial statements of its holding
                 company or affiliate with a name similar to the Dealer Member’s, and those consolidated
                 financial statements are published or circulated in any document or other medium, then either:
                 (i)     the consolidated financial statements must include a note indicating that:
                         (a)     they relate to an entity that is not the Dealer Member, and
                         (b)     although the statements include the Dealer Member’s accounts, they are not the
                                 Dealer Member’s financial statements,

Series 4000 | Dealer Member Financial and Operational Rules                                                    Rule 4200
                                                                   Investment Dealer and Partially Consolidated Rules

                 or
                 (ii)    at the time of publication or circulation, the Dealer Member must send to each client who
                         has traded in his or her account within 12 months of the date of publication:
                         (a)     its unconsolidated summary statement of financial position, and
                         (b)     a letter explaining why the statement is being sent.
4210. - 4219. Reserved.

PART B - GENERAL INTERNAL CONTROL REQUIREMENTS
4220. Introduction
         (1)     Part B of Rule 4200 sets out Corporation requirements for a Dealer Member’s internal controls
                 and risk management infrastructure. Effective internal controls will assist a Dealer Member not
                 only in complying with Corporation requirements and securities laws but also in conducting its
                 business with integrity and due regard to the interests of its clients.
4221. Definitions
         (1)     The following terms have the meaning set out below when used in Part B of Rule 4200:
                   “detective controls”            Controls that discover, or increase the chances of finding, fraud or error,
                                                   so the Dealer Member can take prompt corrective action.
                   “preventive controls”           Controls that prevent, or minimize the chances of, fraud and error.

4222. Adequate internal controls
         (1)     A Dealer Member must establish and maintain appropriate internal controls.
         (2)     The Dealer Member’s Executives are responsible for ensuring adequate internal controls as part
                 of their overall responsibility for managing the Dealer Member’s operations.
         (3)     The Dealer Member’s Executives must use best judgment in determining whether internal
                 controls are adequate.
4223. Preventive controls
         (1)     When necessary, a Dealer Member must implement preventive controls based on the Dealer
                 Member’s Executives’ view of the risk of loss and the cost-benefit relationship of controlling
                 that risk.
4224. Written record
         (1)     A Dealer Member must maintain a detailed written record of its internal controls, including, at a
                 minimum, the policies and procedures the Dealer Member’s Executives have approved to provide
                 reasonable assurance of compliance with all Corporation requirements relating to internal
                 controls.
4225. Review and written approval of internal controls
         (1)     The Dealer Member’s Executives must review a Dealer Member’s internal controls for adequacy
                 and suitability at least annually and more frequently as necessary or stipulated by Corporation



Series 4000 | Dealer Member Financial and Operational Rules                                                                 Rule 4200
                                                                 Investment Dealer and Partially Consolidated Rules

                 requirements. They must approve a Dealer Member’s internal controls in writing after each
                 review.
4226. - 4239. Reserved.

PART C - PRICING INTERNAL CONTROL REQUIREMENTS
4240. Introduction
         (1)     Part C of Rule 4200 sets internal control requirements so that a Dealer Member can ensure that
                 securities, derivatives and precious metals bullion are valued using prices from objective and
                 verifiable sources, and independent management oversight exists to ensure reasonability of
                 prices used.
4241. Pricing procedures
         (1)     A Dealer Member must consistently and accurately price all securities, derivatives and precious
                 metals bullion. In Part C of Rule 4200, references to:
                 (i)     securities include client and inventory positions in securities and securities used in financing
                         transactions such as security borrow and lend, repurchase agreement and reverse
                         repurchase agreement transactions,
                 (ii)    derivatives include client and inventory positions in derivatives, and
                 (iii)   precious metals bullion include client and inventory positions in precious metals bullion.
         (2)     On a daily basis, a Dealer Member must consistently and accurately mark to market its:
                 (i)     long and short security positions ,
                 (ii)    long and short derivative positions, and
                 (iii)   long precious metals bullion positions,
                 to ensure accurate profit and loss reporting in accordance with Corporation requirements.
         (3)     A Dealer Member’s policies and procedures must specifically address consistently pricing and
                 verifying prices of securities, derivatives and precious metals bullion.
         (4)     A Dealer Member’s policies and procedures must specifically address appropriate pricing in
                 security, derivatives and precious metals bullion records that it uses to prepare management
                 reports for monitoring:
                 (i)      inventory profit and loss,
                 (ii)     its regulatory capital position, and
                 (iii)    segregation.
         (5)     A Dealer Member must assign knowledgeable employees, who are independent of its trading
                 functions, to prepare the reports in subsection 4241(4), and must supervise the reports’
                 preparation. Conflicted employees must not be involved in security and precious metals bullion
                 pricing or, failing that, the Dealer Member must adopt compensating procedures to ensure
                 appropriate pricing.




Series 4000 | Dealer Member Financial and Operational Rules                                                      Rule 4200
                                                                   Investment Dealer and Partially Consolidated Rules

4242. Independent price verification and adjustment
         (1)     A Dealer Member must verify its security and precious metals bullion prices at each month-end by
                 comparing them with independent (third-party) pricing sources.
         (2)     The verification work must detect and quantify all pricing differences (distinguishing adjusted and
                 unadjusted differences).
         (3)     An appropriate Executive must:
                 (i)     on a monthly basis, approve the resolution of all material differences, and
                 (ii)    on an annual basis, review and verify the continued appropriateness of the existing pricing
                         sources. Where appropriateness is identified as a material concern, the pricing sources
                         used must be changed.
4243. Retention of supporting documents
         (1)     A Dealer Member must retain supporting documents to show that it has verified security and
                 precious metals bullion pricing and made appropriate adjustments.
4244. Access to records
         (1)     Dealer Member employees involved in security and precious metals bullion trading must not have
                 access to back-office security and precious metals bullion price records.
4245. - 4259. Reserved.

PART D - CALCULATION OF PRICES ON A YIELD BASIS
4260. Introduction
         (1)     Part D of Rule 4200 describes how to calculate a security price based on a security’s current
                 market yield.
4261. Definitions
         (1)     The following term has the meaning set out below when used in Part D Rule 4200:
                   “regular delivery date”        The settlement or delivery dates generally accepted in industry practice for a
                                                  security in the market where the transaction occurs.

4262. Calculating price if no method is stated for calculating unexpired term
         (1)     When a Dealer Member quotes a bid or offer based on yield, and neither the buyer nor seller
                 Dealer Member states a price or a method for calculating the unexpired term, the price must be
                 established according to sections 4264 through 4267.
4263. Exceptions
         (1)     Sections 4264 through 4267 do not apply to trades in:
                 (i)     Government of Canada bonds and bonds guaranteed by the Government of Canada,
                 (ii)    Short-term bonds that have:
                         (a)     an unexpired term to maturity of six months or less,
                         (b)     an unexpired term-to-call date of six months or less and selling at, or at a premium
                                 over, the call price, or

Series 4000 | Dealer Member Financial and Operational Rules                                                               Rule 4200
                                                               Investment Dealer and Partially Consolidated Rules

                         (c)     been called for redemption,
                 (iii)   bonds callable on future dates at varying prices, and
                 (iv)    bonds callable at the issuer’s option if the call date is not stated and the bonds are selling at
                         a premium over call price.
4264. Unexpired term - Bonds with unexpired terms to maturity up to and including 10 years
         (1)     For a bond with an unexpired term to maturity up to and including 10 years, calculate the
                 unexpired term as the exact period in years, months, and days from the regular delivery date:
                 (i)     to the maturity date of a non-callable bond or callable bond selling at less than the call
                         price, and
                 (ii)    to the first redemption date of a callable bond selling at, or at a premium over, the call
                         price.
4265. Unexpired term - Bonds with unexpired terms to maturity over 10 years
         (1)     For a bond with an unexpired term to maturity of over 10 years, calculate the unexpired term as
                 the period in years and months from the month in which the regular delivery date occurs:
                 (i)     to the month and year of maturity of a non-callable bond or callable bond selling at less
                         than the call price, and
                 (ii)    to the first month and year that the bond is redeemable for a callable bond selling at, or at
                         a premium over, the call price.
4266. Calculating the price and price precision
         (1)     In calculating the price, the unexpired term must be expressed as years. To express the unexpired
                 term in years:
                 (i)     one day shall be deemed to be 1/30th of one month, and
                 (ii)    one month shall be deemed to be 1/12th of one year.
         (2)     For all bond transactions between Dealer Members and its clients where the price has been
                 determined using the calculation approach set out in either section 4264 or 4265, the price must
                 be extended to three decimal places of precision.
4267. New issues
         (1)     Part D of Rule 4200 applies to new issues. The unexpired term to maturity is to start on the date
                 that accrued interest, which is charged to the client, is calculated up to.
4268. - 4269. Reserved.

PART E - PROFESSIONAL OPINIONS
4270. Introduction
         (1)     Part E of Rule 4200 sets requirements relating to professional opinion (defined in section 4271)
                 standards.
4271. Definitions
         (1)     The following terms have the meanings set out below when used in Part E of Rule 4200:


Series 4000 | Dealer Member Financial and Operational Rules                                                       Rule 4200
                                                                    Investment Dealer and Partially Consolidated Rules

                    "Corporation standards"          The disclosure standards in Part E of Rule 4200.
                    "disclosure document"            The same meaning as used in relevant securities laws.
                    "fairness opinion"               A report of a valuer that contains the valuer’s opinion as to the fairness, from
                                                     a financial point of view, of a transaction.
                    "formal valuation"               A report of a valuer that contains the valuer’s opinion as to the value or
                                                     range of values of the subject matter of the valuation.
                    “interested party”               The same meaning as used in relevant securities laws.
                    “prior valuation”                The same meaning as used in relevant securities laws.
                    "professional opinion"           A formal valuation or a fairness opinion.
                    "subject transaction"            Transactions including an insider bid, issuer bid, business combinations, or
                                                     related party transaction as defined in relevant securities laws.
                    "valuer"                         The person who provides a professional opinion.

4272. Application
         (1)     The Corporation standards apply only to professional opinions that are prepared either:
                 (i)     pursuant to a requirement of relevant securities laws, or
                 (ii)    for the express purpose of publication in a disclosure document to be filed with any
                         Canadian securities regulatory authority or delivered to security holders in connection with
                         their consideration of the subject transaction.
         (2)     The Corporation standards do not apply to professional opinions that are either:
                 (i)     rendered in connection with transactions other than the subject transactions, whether or
                         not they are reproduced or summarized in a disclosure document, or
                 (ii)    reproduced or summarized in a disclosure document in compliance with relevant securities
                         laws for the disclosure of prior valuations in respect of an issuer.
4273. General requirement
         (1)     A Dealer Member’s professional opinion in connection with a subject transaction must comply
                 with the Corporation standards.
         (2)     A Dealer Member’s compliance with the Corporation standards:
                 (i)     must not substitute the professional judgment and responsibility of the valuer,
                 (ii)    will not be considered compliant if it is not exercised along with professional judgment and
                         responsibility regarding disclosure in a professional opinion, and
                 (iii)   may not be appropriate if its strict compliance is not justified using professional judgment
                         and responsibility.
4274. General disclosure
         (1)     Professional opinions prepared in connection with the subject transactions must provide
                 disclosure that:




Series 4000 | Dealer Member Financial and Operational Rules                                                                  Rule 4200
                                                               Investment Dealer and Partially Consolidated Rules

                 (i)     enables the directors and security holders of the particular issuer to understand the
                         principal judgments and principal underlying reasoning of the valuer in its professional
                         opinion, and
                 (ii)    form a reasoned view on the valuation conclusion or the opinion as to fairness expressed
                         therein.
         (2)     In reaching a valuation or fairness conclusion, a Dealer Member must consider certain
                 information such as, valuation approach, definition of value, key assumptions. That information is
                 described in Part E of Rule 4200 and may be important and required to be disclosed in a
                 professional opinion.
         (3)     If the Dealer Member receives any expressions of concerns relating to its proposed disclosure in a
                 professional opinion that contain competitively or commercially sensitive information regarding
                 an interested party or issuer:
                 (i)     The Dealer Member may seek a decision of the special committee of the issuer's
                         independent directors as to whether the perceived detriment to an interested party
                         outweighs the benefit of disclosure of such information to the readers of the professional
                         opinion.
                 (ii)    Compliance of the Dealer Member with any such decision of a special committee will
                         constitute compliance with the Corporation standards in respect of the matters that are the
                         subject of the decision.
4275. Disclosure - formal valuations
         (1)     A professional opinion that is a formal valuation prepared by a Dealer Member must disclose the
                 following information:
                 (i)     the identity and credentials of the Dealer Member, including:
                         (a)     the general experience of the Dealer Member in valuing other businesses in the same
                                 or similar industries as the business or issuer in question or similar transactions to the
                                 subject transaction,
                         (b)     the Dealer Member’s understanding of the specific marketable securities involved in
                                 the subject transaction, and
                         (c)     the internal procedures followed by the Dealer Member to ensure the quality of the
                                 professional opinion,
                 (ii)    the date the valuer was first contacted in respect of the subject transaction and the date
                         that the valuer was retained,
                 (iii)   the financial terms of the valuer's retainer,
                 (iv)    a description of any past, present or anticipated relationship between the valuer and any
                         interested party or the issuer which may be relevant to the valuer's independence for
                         purposes of relevant securities laws,
                 (v)     the subject matter of the formal valuation,
                 (vi)    the effective date of the formal valuation,
                 (vii) a description of any specific adjustments that have been made in the valuer's conclusions
                       by reason of an event or occurrence after the effective date,


Series 4000 | Dealer Member Financial and Operational Rules                                                        Rule 4200
                                                              Investment Dealer and Partially Consolidated Rules

                 (viii) the scope and purpose of the formal valuation, including the following statement:
                                 "This formal valuation has been prepared in accordance with the disclosure
                                 standards for formal valuations and fairness opinions of [Name of Corporation]
                                 but [Name of Corporation] has not been involved in the preparation or review of
                                 this formal valuation",
                 (ix)    a description of the scope of the review conducted by the valuer, including a summary of
                         the type of information reviewed and relied upon (such as the documents reviewed,
                         individuals interviewed, facilities visited, other expert reports considered and management
                         representations concerning information requested and furnished to the valuer),
                 (x)     a description of any limitation on the scope of review and the implications of such
                         limitation on the valuer's conclusions,
                 (xi)    a description of the business, assets or securities being valued sufficient to allow the reader
                         to understand the valuation rationale and approach and the various factors influencing
                         value that were considered,
                 (xii) definitions of the terms of value used in the formal valuation including but not limited to
                       "fair market value", "market value" and "cash equivalent value”,
                 (xiii) the valuation approach and methodologies considered, including:
                         (a)     the rationale for valuing the business as a going concern or on a liquidation basis,
                         (b)     the reasons for selecting a particular valuation methodology, and
                         (c)     a summary of the key factors considered in selecting the valuation approach and
                                 methodologies considered,
                 (xiv) the key assumptions made by the valuer,
                 (xv) any distinctive material value that the valuer has determined might accrue to an interested
                      party, whether this value is included in the value or range of values arrived at for the
                      subject matter of the formal valuation and the reasons for its inclusion or exclusion,
                 (xvi) the following discussions or explanations:
                         (a)     a discussion of any prior bona fide offers or prior valuations or other material expert
                                 reports considered by the valuer pertaining to the subject matter of the transaction,
                                 or
                         (b)     if the formal valuation differs materially from any such prior valuation, an
                                 explanation of the material differences where reasonably practicable to do so based
                                 on the information contained in the prior valuation or, if it is not reasonably
                                 practicable to do so, the reasons why it is not reasonably practicable to do so,
                          and
                 (xvii) the valuation conclusions reached and any qualifications or limitations to which such
                        conclusions are subject.
         (2)     A professional opinion that is a formal valuation prepared by a Dealer Member in connection with
                 a subject transaction must disclose the following:
                 (i)     Annual financial information




Series 4000 | Dealer Member Financial and Operational Rules                                                       Rule 4200
                                                              Investment Dealer and Partially Consolidated Rules

                         Unless otherwise disclosed through the Canadian continuous disclosure obligations of the
                         issuer or in a disclosure document published in connection with the transaction to which
                         the professional opinion applies:
                         (a)     The professional opinion must disclose a summary of selected material financial
                                 information derived from the statement of profit or loss and other comprehensive
                                 income, statement of financial position and statement of changes in equity for the
                                 most recently completed fiscal year as well as from the statement of financial
                                 position, statement of profit or loss and other comprehensive income and statement
                                 of changes in financial position for the immediately preceding fiscal year.
                 (ii)    Interim financial information
                         Unless otherwise disclosed through the Canadian continuous disclosure obligations of the
                         issuer or in a disclosure document published in connection with the transaction to which
                         the professional opinion applies:
                         (a)     The professional opinion must disclose a summary of selected material financial
                                 information derived from the most recent interim statement of financial position (if
                                 any), statement of profit or loss and other comprehensive income and statement of
                                 changes in equity for the current fiscal year and the comparable statements for the
                                 same interim period of the immediately preceding fiscal year.
                 (iii)   Discussion of historical financial statements or financial position
                         (a)     The professional opinion must include comments on material items or changes in the
                                 issuer's financial statements together with appropriate commentary on items which
                                 may have particular relevance to the professional opinion including but not limited to
                                 unusual capital structures, unrecognized tax-loss carry forwards and redundant
                                 assets.
                 (iv)    Future oriented financial information
                         (a)     To the extent that the valuer has relied upon future-oriented financial information,
                                 the valuer must disclose the future-oriented financial information, at least in
                                 summary form, unless otherwise determined by a decision of the special committee
                                 referred to in section 4274.
                         (b)     To the extent that the future-oriented financial information relied upon by the valuer
                                 varies materially from the future-oriented financial information provided to the
                                 valuer by the issuer or the interested party, the valuer must disclose the nature and
                                 extent of such differences and the rationale of the valuer supporting its judgments.
                 (v)     Future oriented financial information assumptions
                         (a)     To the extent that future-oriented financial information is relied upon (whether or
                                 not the future-oriented financial information itself is disclosed), key financial
                                 assumptions (such as sales, growth rates, operating profit margins, major expense
                                 items, interest rates, tax rates, depreciation rates), together with a brief statement
                                 supporting the rationale for each specific assumption, must also be disclosed, unless
                                 otherwise determined by a decision of the special committee referred to in section
                                 4274.
                 (vi)    Economic assumptions

Series 4000 | Dealer Member Financial and Operational Rules                                                      Rule 4200
                                                               Investment Dealer and Partially Consolidated Rules

                         (a)     Any key economic assumptions having a material impact on the professional opinion
                                 must be disclosed, noting the authoritative source used by the valuer, including
                                 interest rates, exchange rates and general economic prospects in the relevant
                                 markets.
                 (vii) Valuation approach, methodologies and analysis
                          The professional opinion must set out:
                         (a)     the valuation approach and methodologies adopted by the valuer,
                         (b)     together with the principal judgments made in selecting a particular approach or
                                 methodology,
                         (c)     a comparison of valuation calculations and conclusions arrived at through the
                                 different methods considered and the relative importance of each methodology in
                                 arriving at the overall valuation conclusion, and
                         (d)     the information in clauses 4275(2)(viii) through 4275(2)(xii), if relevant for the
                                 valuation techniques used.
                 (viii) Discounted cash flow approach
                         (a)     The professional opinion must include a discussion of all relevant qualitative and
                                 quantitative judgments used to calculate discount rates, multiples and capitalization
                                 rates.
                         (b)     If the capital asset pricing model is used, disclosure must include the basis for
                                 determining the discount rate including the risk free rate, market risk premium, beta,
                                 tax rates and debt to equity capital structure assumed.
                         (c)     The valuer must also disclose the basis for the determination of the terminal/residual
                                 value together with the underlying assumptions made.
                         (d)     The source of the financial data which formed the basis of the discounted cash flow
                                 analysis, summary of major assumptions (if not already disclosed) and the details and
                                 sources of any economic statistics, commodity prices and market forecasts used in
                                 the valuation approach must also be disclosed.
                         (e)     In addition, a summary of the sensitivity variables considered and the general results
                                 of the application of such sensitivity analysis must be disclosed along with an
                                 explanation of how such sensitivity analysis was used in the determination of the
                                 range of valuation estimates resulting from the discounted cash flow approach.
                         (f)     Where the nature of the future-oriented financial information and the subject matter
                                 of the valuation make it reasonably practicable and meaningful to do so, selected
                                 quantitative sensitivity analyses performed by the valuer must be disclosed to
                                 illustrate the effects of variations in the key assumptions on the valuation results.
                         (g)     In determining whether quantitative sensitivity analyses would be meaningful to the
                                 reader of the professional opinion, the valuer must consider whether such analyses
                                 adequately reflects the valuer's judgment concerning the inter-relationship of the key
                                 underlying assumptions.
                 (ix)    Asset based valuation approach



Series 4000 | Dealer Member Financial and Operational Rules                                                           Rule 4200
                                                              Investment Dealer and Partially Consolidated Rules

                         (a)     The professional opinion must separately disclose the values of each significant asset
                                 and liability including off-statement of financial position items (unless otherwise
                                 determined by a decision of the special committee referred to in section 4274).
                         (b)     If a liquidation based valuation approach has been utilized, the professional opinion
                                 must set out the liquidation values for each significant asset and liability together
                                 with summary estimates for significant liquidation costs.
                 (x)     Comparable transaction approach
                         (a)     The professional opinion must disclose (preferably in tabular form) a list of relevant
                                 transactions involving businesses the valuer considers similar or comparable to the
                                 business being valued.
                         (b)     Adequate disclosure must include the date of the transaction, a brief descriptive
                                 note, and relevant multiples implicit in the transaction which may include: earnings
                                 before interest and taxes multiples; earnings before interest, taxes, depreciation and
                                 amortization multiples; earnings multiples; cash flow multiples; and book value
                                 multiples; and take-over premium percentages.
                         (c)     In the body of the professional opinion there must be a discussion of such
                                 transactions together with an explanation as to how such transactions were used by
                                 the valuer in arriving at a valuation conclusion with regard to the comparable
                                 transaction approach.
                 (xi)    Comparable trading approach
                         (a)     The professional opinion must disclose (preferably in tabular form) a list of relevant
                                 publicly traded companies the valuer considers similar or comparable to the business
                                 being valued.
                         (b)     Adequate disclosure must include the date of the market data, the relevant fiscal
                                 periods for the comparable company, a brief descriptive note regarding the
                                 comparable company and relevant multiples implicit in the trading data which may
                                 include: earnings before interest and taxes multiples; earnings before interest, taxes
                                 depreciation and amortization multiples; earnings multiples, cash flow multiples; and
                                 book value multiples.
                         (c)     In the body of the professional opinion there must be a discussion as to the
                                 comparability of such companies, together with an explanation as to how such data
                                 was used by the valuer in arriving at a valuation conclusion with regard to the
                                 comparable trading approach.
                 (xii) Valuation conclusions
                         (a)     The valuer must develop a final valuation range by using a single valuation
                                 methodology or some combination of value conclusions determined under different
                                 methodologies/approaches.
                         (b)     The professional opinion must include a comparison of the valuation ranges
                                 developed under each methodology and a discussion of the reasoning in support of
                                 the valuer's final conclusion.




Series 4000 | Dealer Member Financial and Operational Rules                                                       Rule 4200
                                                              Investment Dealer and Partially Consolidated Rules

4276. Disclosure - fairness opinion
         (1)     A professional opinion that is a fairness opinion prepared by a Dealer Member must disclose the
                 following information:
                 (i)     the identity and credentials of the Dealer Member, including:
                         (a)     the general experience of the Dealer Member in providing fairness opinions in
                                 connection with transactions similar to the subject transaction,
                         (b)     the Dealer Member’s understanding of the specific marketable securities involved in
                                 the subject transaction, and
                         (c)     the internal procedures followed by the Dealer Member to ensure the quality of the
                                 professional opinion,
                 (ii)    the date the Dealer Member was first contacted in respect of the subject transaction and
                         the date that the firm was retained,
                 (iii)   the financial terms of the Dealer Member’s retainer,
                 (iv)    a description of any past, present or anticipated relationship between the Dealer Member
                         and any interested party which may be relevant to the Dealer Member’s independence for
                         purposes of providing the fairness opinion,
                 (v)     the scope and purpose of the fairness opinion, including the following statement:
                                 "This fairness opinion has been prepared in accordance with the disclosure
                                 standards for formal valuations and fairness opinions of [Amalco] but [Amalco]
                                 has not been involved in the preparation or review of this fairness opinion.",
                 (vi)    the effective date of the fairness opinion,
                 (vii) a description of the scope of the review conducted by the Dealer Member, including a
                       summary of the type of information reviewed and relied upon (such as the documents
                       reviewed, individuals interviewed, facilities visited, other expert reports considered and
                       management representations concerning information requested and furnished to the
                       Dealer Member),
                 (viii) a description of any limitation on the scope of review and the implications of such
                        limitation on the Dealer Member’s opinion or conclusion,
                 (ix)    a description of the relevant business, assets or securities sufficient to allow the reader to
                         understand the rationale of the fairness opinion and the approach and various factors
                         influencing financial fairness that were considered,
                 (x)     a description of the valuation or appraisal work performed or relied upon in support of the
                         Dealer Member’s opinion or conclusion,
                 (xi)    a discussion of any prior bona fide offer or prior valuation or other material expert report
                         considered by the Dealer Member in coming to the opinion or conclusion contained in the
                         fairness opinion,
                 (xii) the key assumptions made by the Dealer Member,
                 (xiii) the factors the Dealer Member considered important in performing its fairness analysis,
                 (xiv) the statement of opinion or conclusion as to the fairness, from a financial point of view, of
                       the subject transaction and the supporting reasons, and
                 (xv) any qualifications or limitations to which the opinion or conclusion is subject.

Series 4000 | Dealer Member Financial and Operational Rules                                                      Rule 4200
                                                              Investment Dealer and Partially Consolidated Rules

         (2)     A professional opinion that is a fairness opinion prepared by a Dealer Member in connection with
                 a subject transaction must include the following:
                 (i)     a fairness opinion must include:
                         (a)     a general description of any valuation analysis performed by the opinion provider, or
                         (b)     specific disclosure of a valuation opinion of another valuer which is being relied upon,
                 (ii)    the fairness opinion provider is not required to reach or disclose specific conclusions as to a
                         valuation range or ranges in a fairness opinion,
                 (iii)   the conclusion section of the fairness opinion must include specific reasons for the
                         conclusion that the subject transaction is fair or not fair to security holders, from a financial
                         point of view, and
                 (iv)    support for each of these specific reasons described in clause 4276(2)(iii) must be
                         contained in the body of the professional opinion in sufficient detail to allow the reader of
                         the opinion to understand the principal judgments and principal underlying reasoning of
                         the opinion provider in reaching its opinion as to the fairness of the transaction.
4277. - 4299. Reserved.




Series 4000 | Dealer Member Financial and Operational Rules                                                       Rule 4200
                                                                  Investment Dealer and Partially Consolidated Rules

RULE 4300 | PROTECTION OF CLIENT ASSETS – SEGREGATION, CUSTODY AND CLIENT FREE CREDIT
BALANCES

4301. Introduction
         (1)     Rule 4300 sets out the following Dealer Member requirements relating to the protection of client
                 assets:
                 Part A - Segregation and related internal control requirements:
                            Part A.1 - General segregation requirements
                                         [sections 4311 through 4314]
                            Part A.2 - Bulk segregation calculation
                                         [sections 4315 through 4319]
                            Part A.3 - Security and precious metals bullion usage restrictions and correcting
                                       segregation deficiencies
                                         [sections 4320 through 4326]
                            Part A.4 - Minimum segregation policies and procedures
                                         [sections 4327 through 4332]
                 Part B - Custody and related internal control requirements:
                            Part B.1 - General custody requirements
                                         [sections 4340 through 4343]
                            Part B.2 - Acceptable securities locations
                                         [sections 4344 through 4352]
                            Part B.3 - Written custodial agreement requirement
                                         [sections 4353 and 4354]
                            Part B.4 - Confirmation and reconciliation requirements
                                         [sections 4355 through 4361]
                            Part B.5 - Margin requirements
                                         [sections 4362 through 4368]
                 Part C - Client free credit balance requirements
                            [sections 4380 through 4386]
4302. - 4309. Reserved.

PART A - SEGREGATION AND RELATED INTERNAL CONTROL REQUIREMENTS
4310. Definitions
         (1)     The following terms have the meaning set out below when used in Part A of Rule 4300:
                  “bulk segregation”              Securities and precious metals bullion in segregation for a Dealer Member’s
                                                  clients that are not reserved for particular clients.




Series 4000 | Dealer Member Financial and Operational Rules                                                              Rule 4300
                                                                     Investment Dealer and Partially Consolidated Rules

                  “net loan value”                Of a security means:
                                                   (i)   for a long position, the market value of the security less any margin
                                                         required, and
                                                   (ii) for a short position, the market value of the security plus any margin
                                                        required expressed as a negative number.


                                                  Of a short security option position means, the market value of the option plus
                                                  any margin required expressed as a negative number.

                                                  Of a long precious metals bullion position means, the market value of the
                                                  precious metals bullion less any margin required.
                  “qualifying hedge               For all the accounts of each client:
                  position”                       (i) a long position in a security, and,
                                                  (ii) a short position in a security issued or guaranteed by the same issuer of
                                                       the security in clause (i) of this definition,
                                                  where:
                                                  (iii) the long position is convertible to or exchangeable for securities of the
                                                        same class and number of the securities held in the short position, and
                                                  (iv) the Dealer Member is using the long position as collateral to cover the
                                                       short position.
                  “segregated precious            Precious metals bullion held in segregation by a Dealer Member for a client.
                  metals bullion”
                  “segregated securities”         Securities held in segregation by a Dealer Member for a client.


PART A.1 - GENERAL SEGREGATION REQUIREMENTS
4311. Introduction
         (1)     The general segregation requirements set out the requirements for a Dealer Member to
                 segregate client fully paid and excess margin securities and precious metals bullion.
4312. Fully paid and excess margin securities and precious metals bullion
         (1)     A Dealer Member holding fully paid or excess margin securities and precious metals bullion for a
                 client must:
                 (i)      segregate those securities and precious metals bullion, and
                 (ii)     identify those securities and precious metals bullion as being held in trust for that client.
         (2)     A Dealer Member must not use securities and precious metals bullion held in segregation for its
                 own purposes except with the express written approval of its client under the terms of a cash and
                 securities loan agreement as detailed in section 5840.
         (3)     The Corporation may prescribe how segregated securities and segregated precious metals bullion
                 are held, and how the amount or value of securities and segregated precious metals bullion to be
                 segregated must be calculated.


Series 4000 | Dealer Member Financial and Operational Rules                                                                  Rule 4300
                                                              Investment Dealer and Partially Consolidated Rules

4313. Restricted and non-negotiable securities
         (1)     Securities that are restricted, non-negotiable, or that cannot be made fully negotiable solely by
                 signature or guarantee of the Dealer Member are deemed not to be segregated, unless such
                 securities are registered in the name of the client (or name of a person required by the client) on
                 whose behalf they are being held in an acceptable segregation location.
4314. Segregation of client securities and precious metals bullion
         (1)     A Dealer Member holding segregated securities and segregated precious metals bullion must:
                 (i)      segregate those securities and segregated precious metals bullion in bulk in accordance
                          with sections 4315 through 4319, or
                 (ii)     segregate specific securities and segregated precious metals bullion for each client.
         (2)     A Dealer Member must not segregate in bulk client securities and segregated precious metals
                 bullion that are subject to a written safekeeping agreement.

PART A.2 - BULK SEGREGATION CALCULATION
4315. Steps for bulk segregation calculation
         (1)     A Dealer Member that segregates securities and segregated precious metals bullion in bulk must,
                 in accordance with sections 4316 through 4319:
                 (i)      determine the net loan value and market value of securities and segregated precious
                          metals bullion held in a client’s account,
                 (ii)     calculate the number of segregated securities and segregated precious metals bullion to be
                          segregated in bulk,
                 (iii)    determine the securities and segregated precious metals bullion to use to satisfy
                          segregation requirements, and
                 (iv)    perform regular calculations and compliance reviews.
4316. Net loan value and market value of securities and precious metals bullion in a client’s account
         (1)     A Dealer Member holding securities and precious metals bullion in bulk segregation must
                 determine for all securities and precious metals bullion held for all accounts of each client:
                 (i)     the number or quantity of securities and precious metals bullion that are part of a
                         qualifying hedge position,
                 (ii)    the net loan value of securities and precious metals bullion (excluding securities and
                         precious metals bullion that are part of a qualifying hedge position) less the aggregate
                         debit cash balance in accounts (or plus in the case of a credit), and
                 (iii)   the market value of securities and precious metals bullion (excluding securities and
                         precious metals bullion that are part of a qualifying hedge position) not eligible for margin
                         less the aggregate amount, if any, by which those accounts are under margined as
                         calculated in clause 4316(1)(ii).
         (2)     A Dealer Member must segregate the net loan value of securities and precious metals bullion
                 calculated in clause 4316(1)(ii) and the market value of securities and precious metals bullion
                 calculated in clause 4316(1)(iii) for each client account.

Series 4000 | Dealer Member Financial and Operational Rules                                                       Rule 4300
                                                                      Investment Dealer and Partially Consolidated Rules

         (3)     A Dealer Member is not required to segregate an amount of securities and precious metals
                 bullion greater than the market value of the securities and precious metals bullion held for those
                 accounts.
4317. Calculating the number of client securities to be segregated in bulk
         (1)     A Dealer Member that chooses to satisfy its segregation obligations under section 4312 by
                 segregating in bulk must segregate in bulk for all its clients the number of securities calculated as
                 follows:
                 (i)     Equities securities
                          Number of                           (aggregate loan value or market value of a class or series of security
                          securities required         =       required to be segregated for each client in section 4316) ÷ (loan value
                          to be segregated                    or market value of one unit of the security)
                 (ii)    Debt securities

                                                               (aggregate loan value or market value of a class or series of security
                          Principal amount of
                                                               required to be segregated for each client in section 4316) ÷ (loan
                          securities required to =
                                                               value or market value of each $100 principal amount of the security)
                          be segregated
                                                               x 100, rounded to lowest issuable denomination



4318. Determining securities and precious metals bullion to comply with segregation requirements
         (1)     A Dealer Member may choose any securities or precious metals bullion from a client’s accounts to
                 satisfy the segregation requirements for that client’s positions, subject to the restrictions of
                 applicable securities laws including, without limitation, a requirement that fully paid securities or
                 precious metals bullion in a cash account be segregated before unpaid securities or precious
                 metals bullion.
         (2)     A Dealer Member that sells securities or precious metals bullion required to be segregated for a
                 client must keep them segregated until one business day prior to settlement or value date.
         (3)     Securities or precious metals bullion required to be segregated for a client must not be removed
                 from segregation as a result of the purchase of any securities or precious metals bullion by that
                 client until settlement or value date.
4319. Frequency and review of bulk segregation calculation
         (1)     At least twice weekly, a Dealer Member must determine the securities or precious metals bullion
                 required to be segregated according to the calculations in Part A.2 of Rule 4300.
         (2)     A Dealer Member must conduct a daily review of securities or precious metals bullion segregated
                 for clients to identify any deficiencies that exist between the actual amounts segregated and the
                 amounts, determined in accordance with subsection 4319(1), that are required to be segregated.
                 Where a deficiency exists, the Dealer Member must correct it in accordance with the
                 requirements of sections 4320 through 4326.




Series 4000 | Dealer Member Financial and Operational Rules                                                                   Rule 4300
                                                              Investment Dealer and Partially Consolidated Rules

PART A.3 - SECURITY AND PRECIOUS METALS BULLION USAGE RESTRICTIONS AND CORRECTING SEGREGATION
           DEFICIENCIES
4320. General restrictions
         (1)     A Dealer Member must:
                 (i)     ensure that a segregation deficiency is not knowingly created or increased, and
                 (ii)    not deliver securities or precious metals bullion it holds against payment for the account of
                         any client if those securities or precious metals bullion are required to satisfy the Dealer
                         Member’s segregation requirements.
4321. Correcting segregation deficiencies
         (1)     If any segregation deficiency exists, the Dealer Member must promptly take the most appropriate
                 action necessary to correct the deficiency.
         (2)     Common deficiencies and appropriate remedial actions include, but are not limited to, those in
                 sections 4322 through 4326.
4322. Call loan segregation deficiency
         (1)     A Dealer Member that determines it has a call loan segregation deficiency must recall the
                 securities or precious metals bullion within the business day following the day it determines the
                 deficiency exists.
4323. Securities loan segregation deficiency
         (1)     A Dealer Member that determines it has a securities loan segregation deficiency must:
                 (i)     recall the securities from the borrower, or
                 (ii)    borrow the same issue of securities to cover the deficiency,
                 within the business day following the day it determines the deficiency exists.
         (2)     If the Dealer Member has not received the securities within five business days following the day it
                 determines the deficiency exists, it must undertake to buy-in the securities.
4324. Inventory or trading account short position segregation deficiency
         (1)     A Dealer Member that determines it has an inventory or trading account short position
                 segregation deficiency must:
                 (i)     borrow the same issue of securities to cover the deficiency within the business day
                         following the day it determines the deficiency exists, or
                 (ii)    undertake to purchase the same issue of securities immediately.
4325. Client declared short sales segregation deficiency
         (1)     A Dealer Member that determines it has a client declared short sale segregation deficiency must:
                 (i)     borrow the same issue of securities to cover the deficiency within the business day
                         following the day it determines the deficiency exists, or
                 (ii)    undertake to buy-in the same issue of securities within five business days following the day
                         it determines the deficiency exists.



Series 4000 | Dealer Member Financial and Operational Rules                                                    Rule 4300
                                                              Investment Dealer and Partially Consolidated Rules

4326. Fails – client or other Dealer Members
         (1)     If a Dealer Member has failed to receive securities or precious metals bullion within 15 business
                 days of settlement date from a client or another Dealer Member, the Dealer Member must:
                 (i)      borrow the same issue of securities or precious metals bullion to cover the deficiency, or
                 (ii)    undertake to buy-in the securities or precious metals bullion.

PART A.4 - MINIMUM SEGREGATION POLICIES AND PROCEDURES
4327. General
         (1)     A Dealer Member must, at a minimum, comply with the policies and procedures for segregated
                 securities and segregated precious metals bullion in sections 4328 through 4332 and the
                 supervision requirements in Rule 3900.
4328. Records of segregated securities and precious metals bullion
         (1)     Segregated securities and segregated precious metals bullion must be described as being held in
                 segregation on a Dealer Member’s security and precious metals bullion position record (or
                 related records) and client ledger and statement of account. This description must be in
                 substance a fair representation of how the securities and precious metals bullion are being held
                 in segregation at the custodian and therefore, the box locations of the Dealer Member must have
                 a direct mapping (or relationship) to custody accounts set up at the custodian on behalf of the
                 Dealer Member.
4329. Twice-weekly report of items requiring segregation
         (1)     A Dealer Member must produce a segregation report at least twice weekly.
4330. Reporting segregation deficiency
         (1)     A Dealer Member must set reasonable guidelines so that any material segregation deficiency is
                 reported promptly to the Dealer Member’s appropriate Executives.
4331. Authorized employees to move securities and precious metals bullion
         (1)     A Dealer Member must limit who can move segregated securities and segregated precious metals
                 bullion into or out of segregation to only authorized employees.
4332. Daily supervisory review of segregation report
         (1)     A Dealer Member must do a daily supervisory review of the most recent segregation report
                 produced to identify and correct segregation deficiencies.
         (2)     A Dealer Member must do a supervisory review or adopt and implement other procedures that
                 provide reasonable assurance the segregation report is complete and accurate.




Series 4000 | Dealer Member Financial and Operational Rules                                                    Rule 4300
                                                                   Investment Dealer and Partially Consolidated Rules

4333. - 4339. Reserved.

PART B - CUSTODY AND RELATED INTERNAL CONTROL REQUIREMENTS

PART B.1 - GENERAL CUSTODY REQUIREMENTS
4340. Introduction
         (1)     A Dealer Member takes on certain operational risks when it has custody of securities and precious
                 metals bullion. These risks arise in connection with the location where and by whom they are
                 held and whether a Dealer Member has adequate internal controls to deal with these risks. Part B
                 of Rule 4300 prescribes Corporation requirements for managing the risks related to securities and
                 precious metals bullion custody. As these risks are quantifiable, they are treated as margin
                 charges when calculating Dealer Member risk adjusted capital. This Part B of Rule 4300, in
                 conjunction with Form 1, prescribes these charges.
4341. Definitions
         (1)     The following terms have the meaning set out below when used in Part B of Rule 4300:
                   “external acceptable           An acceptable securities location for securities and precious metals bullion that
                   securities location”           are not under a Dealer Member’s physical possession but which are under a
                                                  Dealer Member’s control.
                   “internal acceptable           An acceptable securities location for securities and precious metals bullion that
                   securities location”           are in a Dealer Member’s physical possession or physical control. Internal
                                                  acceptable securities locations include acceptable transfer locations.
                   “set-off risk”                 The risk exposure resulting when a Dealer Member has other transactions,
                                                  balances or positions with a custodian, and the resulting balances could be set
                                                  off against the value of the securities and precious metals bullion held by the
                                                  custodian.

4342. Hold securities and precious metals bullion in an acceptable securities location
         (1)     A Dealer Member must hold securities and precious metals bullion, including book-based
                 securities, in an acceptable securities location as prescribed in Rule 4300 and Form 1. Acceptable
                 securities locations can either be internal acceptable securities locations, which include
                 acceptable transfer locations; or external acceptable securities locations, which in Form 1 are
                 simply referred to as “acceptable securities locations”.
4343. Timely deposit
         (1)     A Dealer Member must deposit securities and precious metals bullion requiring segregation in an
                 acceptable securities location on a timely basis.

PART B.2 - ACCEPTABLE SECURITIES LOCATIONS
4344. Acceptable internal storage location
         (1)     Securities and precious metals bullion in a Dealer Member’s physical possession must be held in
                 an internal storage location that meets the requirements in section 4345, in order for the internal
                 storage location to be an internal acceptable securities location.

Series 4000 | Dealer Member Financial and Operational Rules                                                                Rule 4300
                                                              Investment Dealer and Partially Consolidated Rules

4345. Acceptable internal storage location requirements
         (1)     A Dealer Member’s internal storage location must:
                 (i)      be subject to ongoing adequate internal controls and systems for safeguarding securities
                          and precious metals bullion, and
                 (ii)    hold all unencumbered securities and precious metals bullion positions in the physical
                         possession of the Dealer Member.
4346. Acceptable transfer locations
         (1)     Securities and precious metals bullion in transfer must be in the possession of a registered or
                 recognized transfer agent and a Dealer Member must comply with the applicable confirmation
                 requirements in sections 4356 through 4360, in order for the transfer location to be an
                 acceptable transfer location.
4347. Securities not under a Dealer Member’s physical possession
         (1)     Securities and precious metals bullion not under a Dealer Member’s physical possession but
                 which are under a Dealer Member’s control must be held in an external acceptable securities
                 location or the Dealer Member must comply with the client waiver requirements in section 4352.
4348. Entities that may be external acceptable securities locations
         (1)     Entities that may be external acceptable securities locations must comply with the Corporation’s
                 requirements prescribed in Rule 4300 and in Form 1. In Form 1, the entities that may qualify as
                 “acceptable securities locations” are grouped into eight categories: depositories and clearing
                 agencies, acceptable institutions and subsidiaries of acceptable institutions, acceptable
                 counterparties, banks and trust companies, mutual funds or their agents, regulated entities,
                 foreign institutions and foreign securities dealers, and entities considered suitable to hold London
                 Bullion Market Association gold and silver good delivery bars.
4349. Approval of foreign institutions and foreign securities dealers
         (1)     To obtain the Corporation’s approval of a foreign institution or foreign securities dealer as an
                 acceptable securities location, a Dealer Member must:
                 (i)     perform due diligence,
                 (ii)    approve the foreign institution or securities dealer as an external acceptable securities
                         location, and
                 (iii)   complete a certificate in the form prescribed by the Corporation evidencing its due
                         diligence and approval.
4350. Application to the Corporation for approval of foreign institutions and foreign securities dealers
         (1)     A Dealer Member must apply in writing to the Corporation for review and approval of a foreign
                 institution or foreign securities dealer as an acceptable securities location.
         (2)     Prior to submission to the Corporation the application must be approved by the Dealer Member’s
                 board of directors or by a committee of the Dealer Member’s board of directors.
         (3)     The application to the Corporation must include the following:



Series 4000 | Dealer Member Financial and Operational Rules                                                     Rule 4300
                                                                      Investment Dealer and Partially Consolidated Rules


                               Document                                   Contents                   Form (if Corporation prescribed)
                  1. Foreign custodian certificate            1. Dealer Member responses to         In a form satisfactory to the
                                                                 custodian due diligence            Corporation
                                                                 questions
                                                              2. Dealer Member certification of
                                                                 approval of foreign custodian
                                                                 as a location for holding
                                                                 securities and precious metals
                                                                 bullion

                  2. Latest audited financial                 Must evidence minimum net
                     statements of proposed                   worth of C$150 million
                     foreign custodian



4351. Annual approval of foreign institutions and foreign securities dealers as acceptable securities locations
         (1)     For a foreign institution or foreign securities dealer to continue to be an acceptable securities
                 location, the Dealer Member’s board of directors or a committee of the Dealer Member’s board
                 of directors must annually:
                 (i)     approve in writing the foreign institution or foreign securities dealer, and
                 (ii)    complete and sign a foreign custodian certificate for the foreign institution or foreign
                         securities dealer.
         (2)     The Dealer Member must file the foreign custodian certificate with the Corporation.
         (3)     The annual approval by the Dealer Member’s board of directors or a committee of the Dealer
                 Member’s board of directors must be given as follows:
                  Document                                    Contents                              Notes

                  Dealer Member’s board material              Dealer Member board’s or              Approval must be documented in
                  and foreign custodian certificate           committee of the Dealer Member        minutes of a meeting.
                                                              board’s annual written approval of    Approval must be available for
                                                              foreign custodian as foreign          review by examiners during a field
                                                              location for holding securities and   examination of the Dealer
                                                              precious metals bullion               Member

         (4)     Without this written approval and filed foreign custodian certificate, the location is a non-
                 acceptable securities location.
4352. Obtaining a client waiver when an external acceptable securities location is unavailable
         (1)     If a Dealer Member holds client securities and precious metals bullion in a foreign jurisdiction
                 where:
                 (i)      applicable laws and circumstances may restrict the transfer of securities and precious
                          metals bullion from that jurisdiction, and
                 (ii)     the Dealer Member cannot arrange to hold the client’s securities and precious metals
                          bullion in the jurisdiction at an external acceptable securities location,

Series 4000 | Dealer Member Financial and Operational Rules                                                                    Rule 4300
                                                                Investment Dealer and Partially Consolidated Rules

                 the Dealer Member must obtain a waiver from the client.
         (2)     The client’s waiver in approved form must be obtained for each transaction.
         (3)     In the waiver, the client must:
                 (i)      consent to the arrangement,
                 (ii)     acknowledge the risks associated with holding securities and precious metals bullion at the
                          specified foreign custodian on behalf of the Dealer Member in the specified country, and
                 (iii)    waive any claims it may have against the Dealer Member and hold the Dealer Member
                          harmless if the foreign custodian loses the securities and precious metals bullion.
         (4)     On obtaining the waiver, a Dealer Member may hold those client securities and precious metals
                 bullion at a custodian in the foreign jurisdiction if the Dealer Member has a written custodial
                 agreement with the custodian.

PART B.3 - WRITTEN CUSTODIAL AGREEMENT REQUIREMENT
4353. Agreement with each external securities location
         (1)     As required in Form 1, a Dealer Member must execute a written custodial agreement with each
                 external custodian. In order for the external custodian to qualify as an external acceptable
                 securities location the written custodial agreement must state that:
                 (i)     the Dealer Member must give prior written consent to any use or disposal of the securities
                         and precious metals bullion,
                 (ii)    security certificates can be delivered promptly on demand or, if certificates are not
                         available and the securities are book-based, must be transferable either from the location
                         or to another person at the location promptly on demand,
                 (iii)   the securities and precious metals bullion are held in segregation for the Dealer Member or
                         its clients free and clear of any charge, lien, claim or encumbrance in favour of the
                         custodian, and
                 (iv)    the custodian indemnifies the Dealer Member against losses due to the custodian’s failure
                         to return any securities, precious metals bullion or other property it holds to the Dealer
                         Member. However, the custodian’s liability is limited to the market value of the securities,
                         precious metals bullion and other property at the time it was required to deliver them to
                         the Dealer Member.
                         When custody is secured by a global custodial agreement, including where the custodian
                         uses a subcustodian, the custodian’s indemnity must:
                         (a)      meet standard industry practice,
                         (b)      be legally enforceable, and
                         (c)      be of sufficient scope and in a form that is acceptable to the Corporation.
4354. Bare trustee custodial agreement
         (1)     For book-based security holdings in which a Dealer Member does not have a written custodial
                 agreement with an external acceptable securities location, the Dealer Member is in compliance



Series 4000 | Dealer Member Financial and Operational Rules                                                     Rule 4300
                                                              Investment Dealer and Partially Consolidated Rules

                 with section 4353 if the Corporation, as bare trustee for Dealer Members, has an approved form
                 of custodial agreement with the custodian.

PART B.4 - CONFIRMATION AND RECONCILIATION REQUIREMENTS
4355. Securities in transit
         (1)     If securities or precious metals bullion are in transit between internal storage locations:
                 (i)      for which there are no adequate internal controls maintained, or
                 (ii)     for more than five business days,
                 those securities or precious metals bullion are not considered to be under the Dealer Member’s
                 control or physical possession for purposes of good segregation.
4356. Confirmations from external acceptable securities locations
         (1)     A Dealer Member must receive a positive confirmation of all securities or precious metals bullion
                 positions annually at its fiscal year-end audit date from each external acceptable securities
                 location.
         (2)     If a Dealer Member does not receive a positive fiscal year end audit confirmation of a securities or
                 precious metals bullion position from an external acceptable securities location, then the Dealer
                 Member must transfer the position to its difference account.
4357. Confirmations from transfer locations in Canada
         (1)     If a Dealer Member has delivered securities for re-registration to a transfer location in Canada,
                 the Dealer Member must receive those securities within 20 business days of delivery.
         (2)     If a Dealer Member has not received those securities within 20 business days of delivery, it must
                 obtain written confirmation of the position receivable from the transfer location within 45
                 business days of delivery.
         (3)     If the position remains unconfirmed after 45 business days from delivery, the transfer location is
                 a non-acceptable transfer location for that position, and the Dealer Member must transfer the
                 position to its difference account.
4358. Confirmations from transfer locations in the United States
         (1)     If a Dealer Member has delivered securities for re-registration to a transfer location in the United
                 States, the Dealer Member must receive those securities within 45 business days of delivery.
         (2)     If a Dealer Member has not received those securities within 45 business days of delivery, it must
                 obtain written confirmation of the position receivable from the transfer location within 70
                 business days of delivery.
         (3)     If the position remains unconfirmed after 70 business days from delivery, the transfer location is
                 a non-acceptable transfer location for that position, and the Dealer Member must transfer the
                 position to its difference account.




Series 4000 | Dealer Member Financial and Operational Rules                                                    Rule 4300
                                                              Investment Dealer and Partially Consolidated Rules

4359. Confirmations from transfer locations outside Canada and the United States
         (1)     If a Dealer Member has delivered securities for re-registration to a transfer location outside
                 Canada and the United States, the Dealer Member must receive those securities within 70
                 business days of delivery.
         (2)     If a Dealer Member has not received those securities within 70 business days of delivery, it must
                 obtain written confirmation of the position receivable from the transfer location within 100
                 business days of delivery.
         (3)     If the position remains unconfirmed after 100 business days from delivery, the transfer location is
                 a non-acceptable transfer location for that position, and the Dealer Member must transfer the
                 position to its difference account.
4360. Confirmations of stock dividends receivable and stock splits
         (1)     If a Dealer Member has not received the securities from a declared stock dividend or stock split
                 within 45 business days of the date receivable, the Dealer Member must obtain written
                 confirmation of the position receivable.
         (2)     If the position remains unconfirmed after 45 business days, the Dealer Member must transfer the
                 position to its difference account.
4361. Reconcile records for mutual funds and evidences of deposit
         (1)     A Dealer Member must, at least monthly, reconcile its records of securities consisting of mutual
                 funds and evidences of deposit with records provided by the issuing mutual fund or financial
                 institution.

PART B.5 - MARGIN REQUIREMENTS
4362. Acceptable securities location
         (1)     For securities or precious metals bullion a Dealer Member holds at an acceptable securities
                 location, custodial related margin requirements only apply to unresolved differences.
4363. Margin charges – non-acceptable securities location
         (1)     For securities a Dealer Member holds at a non-acceptable securities location, additional margin
                 requirements prescribed in this Part B.5 must be provided unless a client waiver is obtained that
                 complies with the requirements in section 4352.
4364. Non-acceptable internal storage and non-acceptable securities location
         (1)     If securities or precious metals bullion are:
                 (i)     not considered to be under the Dealer Member’s control or physical possession for
                         purposes of good segregation under section 4355, or
                 (ii)    not under a Dealer Member’s physical possession and are held at a non-acceptable
                         securities location because:
                         (a)     the location does not meet the criteria for an internal acceptable securities location
                                 as specified in section 4345, or
                         (b)     the location does not meet the criteria for an external acceptable securities location
                                 as specified in section 4348, or

Series 4000 | Dealer Member Financial and Operational Rules                                                      Rule 4300
                                                               Investment Dealer and Partially Consolidated Rules

                         (c)     there is no annual written approval of a foreign institution or foreign securities dealer
                                 as an acceptable securities location as specified in section 4351,
                 then, when it calculates risk adjusted capital, a Dealer Member must deduct 100% of the market
                 value of the securities or precious metals bullion held in custody with the non-acceptable
                 securities location.
4365. No confirmation from location
         (1)     Security and precious metals bullion positions where the Dealer Member has not received:
                 (i)     a positive fiscal year end audit confirmation under subsection 4356(2) or where an
                         adequate month-end reconciliation process is not performed by the Dealer Member,
                 (ii)    a confirmation from a transfer agent, within the required time period, under subsection
                         4357(3), 4358(3) or 4359(3), or
                 (iii)   a confirmation of a related stock split or stock dividend under subsection 4360(2)
                 are not considered to be under the Dealer Member’s control or physical possession for purposes
                 of good segregation and must be transferred to a Dealer Member’s difference account.
         (2)     For difference account positions in subsection 4365(1), the Dealer Member must:
                 (i)     provide for the purposes of calculating risk adjusted capital, as an amount required to
                         margin, the sum of the security and precious metals bullion position market value and the
                         normal inventory margin, and
                 (ii)    undertake to borrow or buy-in the position pursuant to section 4368.
4366. No written custodial agreement
         (1)     If a Dealer Member does not have a written custodial agreement with a custodian, and that entity
                 would otherwise qualify as an acceptable securities location, it must provide margin on the
                 security and precious metals bullion positions held in custody at that custodian in accordance
                 with subsections 4366(2) and 4366(3).
         (2)     Dealer Member has no set-off risk with the custodian
                 (i)     If the Dealer Member has no set-off risk with the custodian, in determining its early
                         warning excess and early warning reserve, the Dealer Member must deduct as a margin
                         requirement 10% of the market value of the security and precious metals bullion positions
                         held in custody at the custodian.
         (3)     Dealer Member has set-off risk with the custodian
                 (i)     If the Dealer Member has set-off risk with the custodian, in determining:
                         (a)      its risk adjusted capital, the Dealer Member must deduct as a margin requirement
                                  the lesser of:
                                  (I)     100% of the set-off risk exposure, and
                                  (II)    100% of the market value of the security and precious metals bullion positions
                                          held in custody
                                  and
                         (b)      its early warning excess and early warning reserve, the Dealer Member must deduct
                                  as a margin requirement the lesser of:

Series 4000 | Dealer Member Financial and Operational Rules                                                       Rule 4300
                                                               Investment Dealer and Partially Consolidated Rules

                                  (I)     10% of the market value of security and precious metals bullion positions held
                                          in custody at the custodian, and
                                  (II)    100% of the market value of security and precious metals bullion positions
                                          held in custody at the custodian less amount required in sub-clause
                                          4366(3)(i)(a).
4367. Records - reconciliation
         (1)     If a Dealer Member reconciles its records to an issuing mutual fund’s or financial institution’s
                 monthly files or statements in accordance with section 4361, the Dealer Member must provide
                 margin based on the requirements in Form 1, Statement B, Line 22, Notes and Instructions for
                 any unresolved differences.
         (2)     If a Dealer Member does not reconcile its records with files or statements received from mutual
                 funds, or financial institutions for evidences of deposit, it must:
                 (i)     in determining its risk adjusted capital, deduct as a margin requirement for unresolved
                         differences an amount equal to:
                         (a)     10% of the market value of the securities, where there have been no transactions in
                                 the securities, other than redemptions and transfers, for at least six months and no
                                 loan value has been given on the securities, or
                         (b)     100% of the market value of the securities,
                 and
                 (ii)    undertake to borrow or buy-in the position pursuant to section 4368.
4368. Difference accounts
         (1)     A Dealer Member must maintain a difference or suspense account to record all security and
                 precious metals bullion positions not received due to unreconcilable differences or errors in any
                 accounts.
         (2)     If a Dealer Member has not received the security and precious metals bullion positions recorded
                 in a difference account within 30 business days of recording the deficiency, the Dealer Member
                 must:
                 (i)     borrow the security or precious metals bullion position to cover the deficiency, or
                 (ii)    undertake to purchase the securities or precious metals bullion immediately.
4369. - 4379. Reserved.

PART C - CLIENT FREE CREDIT BALANCE REQUIREMENTS
4380. Introduction
         (1)     Part C of Rule 4300 restricts a Dealer Member’s use of clients’ free credit balances in its business.
4381. Dealer Member’s use of client free credit balances
         (1)     A Dealer Member may use its clients’ free credit balances in its business only in accordance with
                 Part C of Rule 4300.




Series 4000 | Dealer Member Financial and Operational Rules                                                      Rule 4300
                                                                Investment Dealer and Partially Consolidated Rules

4382. Notation on client account statements
         (1)     A Dealer Member that does not keep its clients’ free credit balances:
                 (i)     segregated in trust for clients in an account with an acceptable institution, and
                 (ii)    separate from other money the Dealer Member receives, must clearly write the following
                         or equivalent on all statements of account it sends to clients:
                                 “Any free credit balances represent funds payable on demand which, although
                                 properly recorded in our books, may not be segregated and may be used in the
                                 conduct of our business.”
4383. Calculating usable free credit balances
         (1)     A Dealer Member must not use in its business an amount of clients’ free credit balances that
                 totals more than the greater of:
                 (i)     general free credit limit:
                         twelve times the Dealer Member’s early warning reserve amount, or
                 (ii)    margin lending adjusted free credit limit:
                         twenty times the Dealer Member’s early warning reserve amount for margin lending
                         purposes plus twelve times the remaining early warning reserve amount for all other
                         purposes, where the remaining early warning reserve amount equals the early warning
                         reserve amount minus 1/20th of the total settlement date client margin debit amount.
         (2)     A Dealer Member must segregate clients’ free credit balances in excess of the amount calculated
                 in subsection 4383(1) either:
                 (i)     in cash held in trust for clients in a separate account with an acceptable institution, and this
                         trust property must be clearly identified as such at the acceptable institution or
                 (ii)    in the following securities:
                          Securities eligible for client free credit segregation purposes
                                                                     Minimum designated
                                                                     rating organization
                          Category                                   current credit rating   Qualification(s)
                          1.     Bonds, debentures, treasury bills   Not applicable (N/A)    Not applicable (N/A)
                                 and other securities with a term
                                 of 1 year or less, issued or
                                 guaranteed by the following:
                                 • national governments of
                                   Canada, United Kingdom, and
                                   United States
                                 • Canadian provincial
                                   governments
                          2.     Bonds, debentures, treasury bills   AAA                     Foreign government must be a
                                 and other securities with a term                            member of the Basel Accord
                                 of 1 year or less, issued or
                                 guaranteed by any other national


Series 4000 | Dealer Member Financial and Operational Rules                                                         Rule 4300
                                                                  Investment Dealer and Partially Consolidated Rules

                                 foreign government not identified
                                 in category 1
                          3.     Canadian bank paper with an           R-1(low), F1, P-1,   No designated rating
                                 original maturity of 1 year or less   A-1(low)             organization has a lower
                                                                                            current credit rating
                                                                                            Must be issued by a Canadian
                                                                                            chartered bank
                                                                                            Securities issued by a provider
                                                                                            of capital, as defined in
                                                                                            Form 1, Schedule 14, are not
                                                                                            eligible

4384. Weekly calculation
         (1)     At least weekly, but more frequently if required, a Dealer Member must calculate the amounts
                 that must be segregated under section 4383.
4385. Daily compliance review
         (1)     Every day, a Dealer Member must compare the amount of client free credit balances it has
                 segregated to the amount subsection 4383(2) requires to be segregated.
         (2)     A Dealer Member must identify and correct any deficiency in amounts of free credit balances
                 required to be segregated within five business days following the determination of the deficiency.
4386. - 4399. Reserved.




Series 4000 | Dealer Member Financial and Operational Rules                                                         Rule 4300
                                                              Investment Dealer and Partially Consolidated Rules

RULE 4400 | PROTECTION OF CLIENT ASSETS – SAFEKEEPING CLIENT ASSETS, SAFEGUARDING CASH
AND SECURITIES, AND INSURANCE

4401. Introduction
         (1)     Rule 4400 sets out the following Dealer Member requirements relating to the protection of client
                 assets:
                 Part A - Safekeeping requirements
                            [sections 4402 through 4407]
                 Part B - Internal controls requirements for safeguarding cash, securities and precious metals
                          bullion
                            [sections 4420 through 4433]
                 Part C - Insurance requirements
                            [sections 4450 through 4468]

PART A - SAFEKEEPING REQUIREMENTS
4402. Introduction
         (1)     Part A of Rule 4400 requires a Dealer Member to have adequate safekeeping arrangements in
                 place to protect its clients’ assets.
4403. Written safekeeping agreement
         (1)     A Dealer Member with securities or precious metals bullion held for safekeeping must have a
                 written safekeeping agreement with each client it holds securities or precious metals bullion for.
4404. Securities free from encumbrance
         (1)     A Dealer Member must keep securities or precious metals bullion held for safekeeping free from
                 any encumbrance.
4405. Procedures to keep securities apart
         (1)     A Dealer Member must keep securities or precious metals bullion held for safekeeping separate
                 from all other positions and must have procedures in place to ensure this separation.
4406. Identifying securities held for safekeeping in records
         (1)     A Dealer Member must specifically identify and record securities or precious metals bullion held
                 for safekeeping in its securities or precious metals bullion position records and client’s ledger and
                 statement of account.
4407. Release of securities held in safekeeping
         (1)     A Dealer Member may release securities or precious metals bullion held for safekeeping to others
                 only when the client so instructs.
4408. - 4419. Reserved.




Series 4000 | Dealer Member Financial and Operational Rules                                                    Rule 4400
                                                              Investment Dealer and Partially Consolidated Rules

PART B - INTERNAL CONTROL REQUIREMENTS FOR SAFEGUARDING CASH, SECURITIES AND PRECIOUS METALS
         BULLION
4420. Introduction
         (1)     Part B of Rule 4400 requires a Dealer Member to have policies and procedures to prevent loss of
                 its clients’ and its own assets.
4421. Safeguarding client and Dealer Member cash, securities and precious metals bullion
         (1)     A Dealer Member must safeguard its clients’ and its own cash, securities and precious metals
                 bullion:
                 (i)      to protect them against material loss, and
                 (ii)     to detect and account for potential losses (for regulatory, financial and insurance purposes)
                          on a timely basis.
         (2)     A Dealer Member’s policies and procedures must specifically address the minimum requirements
                 for safeguarding cash, securities and precious metals bullion as described in sections 4422
                 through 4433.
         (3)     The Corporation recognizes that a Dealer Member with a small operation may be unable to
                 comply with Rule 4400 requirements to segregate duties. If these minimum requirements are
                 inappropriate because of a Dealer Member’s small size, it must implement alternative control
                 procedures that the Corporation approves.
4422. Receipt and delivery of securities and precious metals bullion
         (1)     Employees who receive and deliver physical securities and precious metals bullion must not have
                 access to the Dealer Member’s securities and precious metals bullion records.
         (2)     The Dealer Member must handle securities and precious metals bullion in a restricted and secure
                 area.
         (3)     The receipt and delivery of securities and precious metals bullion must be promptly and
                 accurately recorded (including certificate numbers, registrations, and coupon numbers).
         (4)     A Dealer Member using mail service must send negotiable certificates by registered mail.
         (5)     A Dealer Member must obtain signed receipts from the client or agent for all securities and
                 precious metals bullion not delivered against payment.
4423. Restricting access to securities
         (1)     Only designated employees may physically handle securities.
         (2)     Securities must be physically handled only in a restricted and secure area.
         (3)     Only employees not involved in maintaining or balancing Dealer Member records may handle
                 physical securities.
4424. Clearing
         (1)     A Dealer Member must promptly compare and balance its records with reports of the previous
                 day’s settlements.




Series 4000 | Dealer Member Financial and Operational Rules                                                    Rule 4400
                                                              Investment Dealer and Partially Consolidated Rules

         (2)     Only employees who do not carry out trading functions may reconcile clearing or settlement
                 accounts.
         (3)     A Dealer Member must take prompt action to correct differences in its records.
         (4)     A Dealer Member must regularly review aged “fails to deliver” and “fails to receive” and identify
                 the reason for settlement delay.
         (5)     Any fail that continues for an extended period of time must be promptly reported to the Dealer
                 Member’s appropriate Executives.
         (6)     A Dealer Member must not use a client account security position to settle a short “pro” sale
                 unless it has obtained written permission from, and provided appropriate collateral to, the client
                 pursuant to:
                 (i)     a margin account agreement, or
                 (ii)    a cash and security loan agreement,
                 that has been executed in accordance with Corporation requirements.
         (7)     A Dealer Member must reconcile its records daily with clearing corporation and depository
                 records to ensure they agree.
4425. Protecting securities and precious metals bullion
         (1)     A Dealer Member must assess the risk of any location that holds securities or precious metals
                 bullion for it and for the accounts of its clients.
         (2)     A Dealer Member’s processing controls must separate duties for recording entries from duties for
                 initiating transfers on depository records (for instance, transfers between the “free” and “seg”
                 boxes).
         (3)     At least monthly, a Dealer Member must reconcile its records of security, precious metals bullion
                 and other asset positions to the custodian’s records where the positions are held. The Dealer
                 Member must investigate differences and make appropriate adjustment entries as necessary.
         (4)     A Dealer Member must have a proper written custody agreement with each custodian where
                 securities and precious metals bullion are held.
4426. How to handle security records
         (1)     Employees maintaining and balancing securities and precious metals bullion records must not be
                 involved in handling physical securities and precious metals bullion.
         (2)     A Dealer Member must promptly update its securities and precious metals bullion records to
                 reflect changes in location and ownership of securities and precious metals bullion under its
                 control.
         (3)     Journal entries made to securities and precious metals bullion records must be clearly identified
                 and a Dealer Member must review and approve adjustments before processing.
4427. Rules for counting securities
         (1)     At least once a year, a Dealer Member must count physical securities and precious metals bullion
                 held:
                 (i)     in segregation, and


Series 4000 | Dealer Member Financial and Operational Rules                                                  Rule 4400
                                                              Investment Dealer and Partially Consolidated Rules

                 (ii)    for safekeeping,
                 in addition to its annual external audit physical securities and precious metals bullion count.
         (2)     At least monthly, a Dealer Member must count physical securities and precious metals bullion
                 held in current boxes.
         (3)     Only employees who do not handle securities and precious metals bullion may conduct physical
                 securities and precious metals bullion counts.
         (4)     Count procedures must include all physical securities and precious metals bullion held in the box
                 location subject to the count and must simultaneously verify related positions such as positions in
                 transit or in the process of being transferred.
         (5)     During a physical securities and precious metals bullion count, both the description of the security
                 and the quantity must be compared to the Dealer Member’s records. Any discrepancies must be
                 investigated and corrected promptly. Positions not reconciled within a reasonable period must be
                 promptly reported to the Dealer Member’s appropriate Executives and accounted for.
4428. Moving certificates, securities and precious metals bullion between branches
         (1)     A Dealer Member must record the location of certificates in transit between its offices in separate
                 transit accounts on its security position records. The Dealer Member must reconcile these
                 accounts monthly.
         (2)     When securities or precious metals bullion are in transit, a Dealer Member must book out the
                 securities or precious metals bullion from the branch account and book them into the transit
                 account. When the securities or precious metals bullion are physically received at a branch, the
                 Dealer Member must book them out of the transit account and into the receiving branch’s
                 account.
         (3)     The receiving branch must check securities or precious metals bullion received against the
                 accompanying transit sheet.
         (4)     The methods of transportation a Dealer Member chooses for securities or precious metals bullion
                 in transit must:
                 (i)     comply with insurance policy terms, and
                 (ii)    take into account the value, negotiability, urgency, and cost factors.
4429. Transferring securities
         (1)     A Dealer Member must maintain a record showing all securities sent to, and held by, transfer
                 agents.
         (2)     Only authorized employees outside the transfer department should be able to request transfers
                 into a name other than the Dealer Member's name. Only fully-paid securities (new issues
                 excepted) may be transferred into a name other than the Dealer Member’s name.
         (3)     The transfer department may carry out transfers only when it receives a properly authorized
                 request.
         (4)     A Dealer Member's security position record must record, and name them as, “securities out for
                 transfer”.
         (5)     A Dealer Member must have a receipt for a securities position at a transfer agent.

Series 4000 | Dealer Member Financial and Operational Rules                                                   Rule 4400
                                                              Investment Dealer and Partially Consolidated Rules

         (6)     A Dealer Member must prepare, and the department manager or another appropriate manager
                 must review, a weekly ageing of all transfer positions to verify the validity of the positions and
                 the reasons for any undue delay in receiving securities from transfer agents.
         (7)     Authorized employees handling transfers must not have other security cage functions such as
                 deliveries, or the management of current box and segregated box positions.
4430. Re-organization
         (1)     A Dealer Member must have a formal procedure to identify and record the timing and terms of all
                 issuances such as forthcoming rights and offers.
         (2)     A Dealer Member must have a clear method of communicating upcoming re-organization
                 activities to the sales force. These include deadlines for submitting special instructions in writing
                 and any special handling procedures required for key dates.
         (3)     An authorized employee or department must have clear responsibility for organizing and handling
                 each offer.
         (4)     A Dealer Member must clearly define procedures to balance positions daily and to physically
                 control securities.
         (5)     A Dealer Member must regularly reconcile and review suspense accounts involving offers and
                 splits.
4431. Handling dividends and interest
         (1)     A Dealer Member must have a system to record the total dividends and interest payable and
                 receivable at due date.
         (2)     Dividend and interest record keeping employees must not handle cash or authorize payments.
         (3)     At least monthly, a Dealer Member must:
                 (i)     reconcile dividend and interest accounts, and
                 (ii)    review aged dividend receivables.
         (4)     Only the department manager or another appropriate manager may authorize dividend and
                 interest write-offs.
         (5)     The department manager or another appropriate manager must approve journal entries to and
                 from dividend and interest accounts.
         (6)     A Dealer Member:
                 (i)     must not pay dividend claims, other than as part of an automatic settlement system, unless
                         accompanied by supporting documents such as proof of registration, and
                 (ii)    must compare supporting documents with internal records for validity and then have the
                         department manager or another appropriate manager approve them.
         (7)     A Dealer Member must withhold non-resident tax when required by law.
         (8)     Where required by applicable laws, a Dealer Member must ensure client income is appropriately
                 reported for income tax purposes.
4432. Reconciling internal accounts
         (1)     At least monthly, a Dealer Member must reconcile internal accounts.

Series 4000 | Dealer Member Financial and Operational Rules                                                     Rule 4400
                                                                     Investment Dealer and Partially Consolidated Rules

         (2)     A department manager or another appropriate manager must review the reconciliation.
4433. Cash
         (1)     The department manager or another appropriate manager must review and approve all bank
                 reconciliations.
         (2)     At least monthly, a Dealer Member must reconcile bank accounts in writing, identifying and
                 dating all reconciling items.
         (3)     Journal entries to clear reconciling items must be made on a timely basis and approved by a
                 department manager or another appropriate manager.
         (4)     Bank accounts must be reconciled by employees who do not have:
                 (i)     access to funds, either receipts or disbursements, or
                 (ii)    access to security, precious metals bullion or derivative positions, or
                 (iii)   record keeping responsibilities that include the authority to write or approve journal
                         entries.
         (5)     An appropriate Executive must establish criteria for approving the requisition of a cheque.
         (6)     Cheques must be pre-numbered, and a Dealer Member must account for numerical continuity.
         (7)     Cheques must be signed by two authorized employees.
         (8)     The authorized employees must only sign a cheque when the appropriate supporting documents
                 are provided. The supporting documents must be cancelled after they sign the cheque.
         (9)     A Dealer Member must limit and supervise access to any facsimile signature machine.
4434. - 4449. Reserved.

PART C - INSURANCE REQUIREMENTS
4450. Introduction
         (1)     Part C of Rule 4400 requires a Dealer Member to have enough insurance to protect against
                 potential losses from theft, fraudulent acts, and other losses.
4451. Definitions
         (1)     The following terms have the meanings set out below when used in Part C of Rule 4400:
                  “base amount”                    The greater of:
                                                    (i) the aggregate client net equity for all client accounts, where net equity
                                                        for each client is the excess, if any, of the total value of cash, securities,
                                                        derivatives, precious metals bullion, and other acceptable property the
                                                        Dealer Member owes to the client over the total value of cash, securities,
                                                        derivatives, precious metals bullion, and other acceptable property the
                                                        client owes to the Dealer Member, and
                                                   (ii)      the aggregate Dealer Member liquid and other allowable assets
                                                             calculated in accordance with Form 1, Statement A.
                  “other acceptable                 The same meaning as set out in Schedule 10 of Form 1.
                  property”



Series 4000 | Dealer Member Financial and Operational Rules                                                                   Rule 4400
                                                                   Investment Dealer and Partially Consolidated Rules

                  “standard form financial          The standard form of Financial Institution Bond insurance coverage a Dealer
                  institution bond”                 Member must obtain.

4452. Dealer Member must have insurance
         (1)     A Dealer Member must have and maintain insurance:
                 (i)     against the types of loss, and
                 (ii)    with at least the minimum amount of coverage,
                 as prescribed in Part C of Rule 4400.
4453. Qualified insurance carriers
         (1)     A Dealer Member must obtain and maintain insurance underwritten by either:
                 (i)     an insurer registered or licensed under the laws of Canada or a province of Canada, or
                 (ii)    a foreign insurer the Corporation has approved.
4454. Foreign insurers
         (1)     To obtain Corporation approval, a foreign insurer must:
                 (i)     have a minimum net worth of $75 million on its last audited statement of financial position,
                 (ii)    have financial information acceptable to, and available for inspection by, the Corporation,
                         and
                 (iii)   satisfy the Corporation that it is subject to supervision by regulatory authorities in its
                         incorporation jurisdiction that is substantially similar to a Canadian insurance company’s
                         supervision.
4455. Mail insurance
         (1)     A Dealer Member must have mail insurance that covers 100% of losses from any outgoing
                 shipments of negotiable or non-negotiable securities by registered mail.
         (2)     If a Dealer Member delivers a written promise to the Corporation that it will not use registered
                 mail for outgoing shipments of securities, the Corporation may exempt the Dealer Member from
                 the requirement in subsection 4455(1).
4456. Financial institution bond
         (1)     A Dealer Member must have and maintain insurance against losses, using a financial institution
                 bond with a discovery rider attached or discovery provisions incorporated in the financial
                 institution bond. The five types of losses the insurance must cover are:
                 (i)     Fidelity - Any loss, including loss of property, from a dishonest or fraudulent act of a Dealer
                         Member’s employees:
                         (a)     committed anywhere, and
                         (b)     committed alone or with others.
                 (ii)    On premises - Any loss of money, securities, precious metals bullion, or other property
                         through robbery, burglary, theft, hold-up or other fraudulent means, mysterious
                         disappearance, damage, or destruction while in any of:
                         (a)     the insured’s offices,
                         (b)     a banking institution’s offices,

Series 4000 | Dealer Member Financial and Operational Rules                                                              Rule 4400
                                                                 Investment Dealer and Partially Consolidated Rules

                         (c)     a clearing house, or
                         (d)     a recognized place of safe-deposit,
                         all as defined in the standard form financial institution bond.
                 (iii)   In transit - Any loss of money and negotiable or non-negotiable securities, precious metals
                         bullion or other property, while in transit. The value of securities, precious metals bullion in
                         transit in an employee’s or agent’s custody must not exceed the protection under this
                         clause. In transit coverage must be calculated on a dollar for dollar basis. A Dealer Member
                         must provide, for Corporation approval, a list of exceptions to the money, securities,
                         precious metals bullion, or other property protected under this clause.
                 (iv)    Forgery or alterations - Any loss through forgery or alteration of any:
                         (a)     cheques,
                         (b)     drafts,
                         (c)     promissory notes, or
                         (d)     other written orders or directions to pay sums in money,
                         excluding securities, as defined in the standard form financial institution bond.
                 (v)     Securities - Any loss:
                         (a)     through the purchase, acquisition, sale, delivery, extension of credit, or action on
                                 securities or other written instruments which prove to have been:
                                 (I)     forged,
                                 (II)    counterfeited,
                                 (III)   raised or altered, or
                                 (IV)    lost or stolen,
                                 or
                         (b)     due to having guaranteed in writing or having witnessed any signatures on any
                                 transfers, assignments or other documents or written instruments, as defined in the
                                 standard form financial institution bond.
4457. General minimum insurance requirement
         (1)     Self-clearing and Type 3 and Type 4 introducing brokers must maintain minimum insurance for
                 each clause in subsection 4456(1) for the greater of:
                 (i)     $500,000, and
                 (ii)    1% of the base amount,
                 provided that the minimum amount need not exceed $25,000,000 for each clause.
4458. Minimum insurance requirement for certain introducing brokers
         (1)     Type 1 and Type 2 Introducing brokers must maintain minimum insurance for each clause in
                 subsection 4456(1) for the greater of:
                 (i)     $200,000 for a Type 1 introducing broker arrangement or $500,000 for Type 2 introducing
                         broker arrangement, and
                 (ii)    ½% of the base amount,
                 provided that the minimum amount need not exceed $25,000,000 for each clause.

Series 4000 | Dealer Member Financial and Operational Rules                                                       Rule 4400
                                                              Investment Dealer and Partially Consolidated Rules

4459. Double aggregate limit
         (1)     A Dealer Member must maintain minimum insurance coverage with a double aggregate limit or a
                 provision for full reinstatement.
4460. Calculating minimum insurance requirement and risk adjusted capital provisions
         (1)     Every month, a Dealer Member must calculate its required minimum insurance coverage and file
                 Schedule 10 of Form 1 with its monthly financial report.
         (2)     In calculating minimum insurance coverage requirements, a Dealer Member must treat non-
                 negotiable and negotiable form securities as the same.
         (3)     When calculating its risk adjusted capital amount, a Dealer Member must provide capital for the
                 amount of its insurance deductible.
4461. Correction of insufficient coverage
         (1)     If a Dealer Member has less coverage than the calculated minimum insurance requirement
                 coverage and the deficiency:
                 (i)     is less than 10% of the minimum insurance requirement, the Dealer Member must correct
                         the deficiency within two months of the filing date of the monthly financial report within
                         which the deficiency was reported, or
                 (ii)    is 10% or more of the insurance requirement, the Dealer Member must promptly notify the
                         Corporation and correct the deficiency within 10 days of identifying it.
4462. Global financial institution bonds
         (1)     If a Dealer Member maintains insurance under Part C of Rule 4400 that names the insured as, or
                 that benefits, the Dealer Member and any other person, then:
                 (i)     the Dealer Member must have the right to claim directly against the insurer for losses, and
                         payment or satisfaction of losses must be made directly to the Dealer Member, and
                 (ii)    the individual or aggregate limits under the standard form financial institution bond may
                         only be affected by claims made by or for:
                         (a)     the Dealer Member,
                         (b)     the Dealer Member’s subsidiaries whose financial results are consolidated with the
                                 Dealer Member’s, or
                         (c)     the Dealer Member’s holding company, if the holding company does not carry on any
                                 business or own any investments other than its interest in the Dealer Member.
                         This applies no matter what the claims, experience, or any other factor that refers to any
                         other person.
4463. Notify the Corporation of underwriter insurance termination
         (1)     A Dealer Member’s standard form financial institution bond and mail insurance policies must
                 require the underwriter to notify the Corporation at least 30 days before the underwriter
                 terminates or cancels insurance coverage.




Series 4000 | Dealer Member Financial and Operational Rules                                                   Rule 4400
                                                              Investment Dealer and Partially Consolidated Rules

4464. When insurance ends due to take-over
         (1)     A Dealer Member taken over by another entity must ensure it has standard form financial
                 institution bond coverage for 12 months from the date of the take-over to cover discovery of any
                 losses it had before the take-over date.
         (2)     The Dealer Member must ensure that any additional premium is paid.
4465. Notify the Corporation of claims
         (1)     A Dealer Member must give written notice to the Corporation within two business days of
                 reporting a claim to the insurer or its authorized representative.
4466. Board of directors review and designation
         (1)     A Dealer Member’s policies and procedures must require its board of directors or the executive
                 committee of the Dealer Member’s board of directors to:
                 (i)     review and approve the insurance requirements and level of coverage at least annually,
                         and
                 (ii)    designate an appropriate Executive to be responsible for insurance matters.
4467. Executive review
         (1)     A Dealer Member’s policies and procedures must require the Executive responsible for insurance
                 matters:
                 (i)     review regularly the terms of the Dealer Member’s insurance policies and design of the
                         Dealer Member’s operating procedures so that the Dealer Member is in compliance with
                         those terms,
                 (ii)    monitor business changes and evaluate the need for changes in coverage or operating
                         procedures, and
                 (iii)   monitor business operations so that insured losses are identified, insurer notified and
                         claimed on a timely basis and their effect on aggregate limits are taken into account.
4468. Executive prompt action
         (1)     A Dealer Member’s policies and procedures must require the appropriate Executive to:
                 (i)     take prompt action to avert or remedy any projected or actual insurance deficiency, and
                 (ii)    notify the Corporation immediately of any deficiencies, pursuant to clause 4461(1)(ii).
4469. - 4499. Reserved.




Series 4000 | Dealer Member Financial and Operational Rules                                                   Rule 4400
                                                                    Investment Dealer and Partially Consolidated Rules

RULE 4500 | FINANCING ARRANGEMENTS - REPURCHASE MARKET TRADING PRACTICES

4501. Introduction
         (1)     Rule 4500 sets out a standard set of trading practices to increase the transparency of the
                 repurchase agreement or reverse repurchase agreement markets and to promote liquidity and
                 efficiency in the markets.
4502. Definitions
         (1)     The following terms have the meaning set out below when used in Rule 4500:
                  “best efforts”                   A repurchase agreement or reverse repurchase agreement trade where the
                                                   buyer assumes the risk that the seller cannot deliver the securities within the
                                                   specified time.
                  “CDSX”                           The CDS clearing and settlement system comprising the Depository Service and
                                                   the Settlement Service.
                  “forward repo”                   A repurchase agreement or reverse repurchase agreement trade that settles
                                                   later than next day.
                  “general collateral”             Government of Canada debt that is CDSX eligible, including real-return bonds
                                                   and strips (residuals and coupons). For real-return bonds an all-in price should
                                                   be used and the coupon exchanged on coupon payment date.
                  “inter-dealer broker”            An organization that provides clients information, electronic trading and
                                                   communications services for trading in wholesale financial markets.
                  “odd-lot”                        A lot less than $25 million for either:
                                                   (i) overnight and term general collateral, or
                                                   (ii) specials, both term and overnight.

4503. General
         (1)     A Dealer Member trading in the repurchase agreement or reverse repurchase agreement market
                 that does not include all necessary terms about sales and set-offs in an agreement with the other
                 party must make a capital adjustment as set out in Form 1.
4504. Marking to market
         (1)     Unless otherwise agreed by the parties, a Dealer Member must periodically review its margins to
                 ensure that they are still appropriate for the maturity dates.
         (2)     Unless otherwise agreed by the parties, a Dealer Member that wants to mark-to-market its
                 counterparties must do so by 11:30 a.m.. The mark-to-market must be done on a net basis and
                 not done by issue.
         (3)     If the parties cannot agree on a price, the current mid-market prices must be used to determine
                 the mark-to-market price. A Dealer Member must use the composite prices on an inter-dealer
                 broker’s screen to determine mid-market price.
         (4)     A Dealer Member must maintain margin through margin calls and not through substitutions.
         (5)     Cash and collateral considerations:


Series 4000 | Dealer Member Financial and Operational Rules                                                                 Rule 4500
                                                              Investment Dealer and Partially Consolidated Rules

                 (i)     unless the parties agree otherwise, all dealer-to-dealer margin calls must be met with the
                         transfer of cash or collateral,
                 (ii)    if a Dealer Member chooses to meet the margin call with cash, the cash must not be used
                         to change the economic nature of the trade. The cash will bear interest at the rate agreed
                         between the parties,
                 (iii)   if a Dealer Member chooses to meet a margin call using collateral, the collateral must have
                         characteristics similar to or better than the security being repurchased or resold, be
                         reasonably acceptable to the other party and be applied on a reasonable basis, and
                 (iv)    a Dealer Member may deliver a maximum of one piece of collateral per million dollars.
         (6)     A Dealer Member that wishes to substitute previously margined collateral must do so by
                 11:30 a.m.
4505. Forward repo trade confirmations
         (1)     A Dealer Member must send the client a confirmation of all forward repo trades on the trade date
                 of the trade agreement.
         (2)     In addition to the disclosures set out in section 3816, the written confirmation must contain, at a
                 minimum, the:
                 (i)     money or par amount, as applicable,
                 (ii)    start date,
                 (iii)   end date,
                 (iv)    interest rate,
                 (v)     collateral type, and
                 (vi)    any substitution rights.
         (3)     All forward repo trades must be confirmed on the CDSX system.
4506. Obligation to make coupon payments
         (1)     A repurchase agreement or reverse repurchase agreement seller must receive payment from the
                 repurchase agreement or reverse repurchase agreement buyer of any income on the securities
                 that the seller would have been entitled to if it had not entered the repurchase agreement or
                 reverse repurchase agreement transaction.
         (2)     A repurchase agreement or reverse repurchase agreement buyer does not need to transfer an
                 amount equal to the income payment to the repurchase agreement or reverse repurchase
                 agreement seller, but can apply it to reduce the amount transferred to the repurchase agreement
                 or reverse repurchase agreement buyer at the end of the transaction. All repurchase agreements
                 or reverse repurchase agreements are priced this way, unless otherwise agreed.
4507. Substitutions
         (1)     A repurchase agreement or reverse repurchase agreement purchaser does not need to accept
                 collateral substitutions unless it agreed to do so before the transaction.
         (2)     Collateral passed for an overnight or term trade may be substituted on a best efforts basis only.




Series 4000 | Dealer Member Financial and Operational Rules                                                  Rule 4500
                                                              Investment Dealer and Partially Consolidated Rules

4508. General collateral repurchase agreement or reverse repurchase agreement allocations
         (1)     General collateral transactions in the repurchase agreement or reverse repurchase agreement
                 market are allocated based on the type of transaction. The general allocation methods for cash
                 settlements, forward settlements and replacement transactions when substitutions occur are set
                 out in section 4508.
         (2)     Money-fill basis:
                 (i)     general collateral transactions are completed on a money-fill basis as explained in clause
                         4508(2)(ii), unless otherwise agreed,
                 (ii)    a transaction executed on a money-fill basis means that the loan or principal amount
                         allocated must be equal to the loan amount transacted. Collateral allocations will be no
                         more than two issues to make $50 million, and
                 (iii)   clause 4508(2)(ii) applies to cash trades, forward settlements and substitutions.
         (3)     If a transaction is executed on a par basis:
                 (i)     the allocated amount must equal the par amount for cash and forward settlements, and
                 (ii)    for substitutions, the replacement transaction must be done on the basis of the par
                         amount originally transacted.
         (4)     Special repurchase agreement or reverse repurchase agreement trades must be done on a par
                 basis.
4509. Confidentiality
         (1)     Subject to subsection 4509(3), all Dealer Members and inter-dealer brokers must maintain the
                 confidentiality of the names of the parties to a trade.
         (2)     Dealer Members and inter-dealer brokers must not ask questions to try to discover the identity of
                 a party.
         (3)     Certain information may be disclosed as follows:
                 (i)     for a trade that is done through an inter-dealer broker, a Dealer Member may disclose the
                         identity of a party to only counterparties to the trade after the trade is completed,
                 (ii)    an inter-dealer broker may inform a Dealer Member that it does not have a line of credit
                         with the other party to the trade before a market is made, as long as it does not give any
                         other information about that party,
                 (iii)   for a name “give up” trade, the full names of parties must be disclosed to counterparties to
                         the trade at the time of the trade to ensure that Dealer Members follow proper credit
                         procedures, and
                 (iv)    subsections 4509(1) and 4509(2) do not prevent Dealer Members or inter-dealer brokers
                         from asking or answering questions to determine the size of the bid or offer.
4510. - 4599. Reserved.




Series 4000 | Dealer Member Financial and Operational Rules                                                    Rule 4500
                                                                   Investment Dealer and Partially Consolidated Rules

RULE 4600 | FINANCING ARRANGEMENTS - CASH AND SECURITIES LOAN, REPURCHASE
AGREEMENT, AND REVERSE REPURCHASE AGREEMENT TRANSACTIONS

4601. Introduction
         (1)     Rule 4600 covers requirements for cash and securities loan, repurchase agreement transactions,
                 and reverse repurchase agreement transactions and includes:
                 (i)     definitions,
                 (ii)    general requirements,
                 (iii)   written agreement requirement,
                 (iv)    cash and securities loans between a Dealer Member and an acceptable institution or
                         acceptable counterparty,
                 (v)     cash and securities loans between regulated entities, and
                 (vi)    cash and securities loans with other counterparties.
4602. Definitions
         (1)     The following terms have the meaning set out below when used in Rule 4600:
                  “overnight cash loan              An oral or written agreement under which a Dealer Member deposits cash
                  agreement”                        with another Dealer Member for up to two business days.
                  “Schedule I chartered             A Schedule I bank under the Bank Act (Canada) that has a capital and reserves
                  bank”                             position of one billion dollars ($1,000,000,000) or more at the time of the
                                                    securities loan transaction.

4603. General requirements
         (1)     Marking to market
                 (i)     Borrowed securities and collateral must be marked to market daily on a loan by loan basis.
         (2)     Record transactions
                 (i)     A Dealer Member must record all financing transactions in its records.
         (3)     Loan accounts
                 (i)     A Dealer Member must keep financing accounts separate from the Dealer Member’s
                         securities trading accounts.
                 (ii)    A Dealer Member must keep financing accounts separate from the client’s securities trading
                         accounts.
         (4)     Confirmations and month-end statements
                 (i)     A Dealer Member must issue confirmations and month-end statements, except when the
                         transaction with other regulated entities is processed through an acceptable clearing
                         corporation.
         (5)     Buy-ins
                 (i)     A Dealer Member must begin a buy-in (liquidating transaction) within two business days of
                         the date on which the buy-in notice is given.



Series 4000 | Dealer Member Financial and Operational Rules                                                              Rule 4600
                                                              Investment Dealer and Partially Consolidated Rules

4604. Written agreement requirement
         (1)     If a Dealer Member has a cash and securities loan agreement, other than an overnight cash loan
                 agreement, that agreement must be in writing and contain the minimum provisions described in
                 section 5840.
         (2)     If a Dealer Member has a written agreement for repurchase agreement transaction or reverse
                 repurchase agreement transaction, that agreement must include the parties’ acknowledgment
                 that either has the right, on notice, to call for any shortfall in the difference between the
                 collateral and the securities at any time.
         (3)     If a Dealer Member does not have a written agreement for a securities loan, a repurchase
                 agreement transaction or reverse repurchase agreement transaction, then applicable margin
                 rates are affected.
4605. Cash and securities loans between a Dealer Member and an acceptable institution or acceptable
      counterparty
         (1)     When a cash or securities loan is between a Dealer Member and an acceptable institution or an
                 acceptable counterparty, they may use as collateral letters of credit that a Schedule I chartered
                 bank issues.
4606. Cash and securities loans between regulated entities
         (1)     If a cash or securities loan is between regulated entities:
                 (i)     the written cash and securities loan agreement must state that either party has the right, at
                         any time by giving notice to the other party, to call for any shortfall in the difference
                         between the collateral and the borrowed cash or securities, and
                 (ii)    they may use as collateral, a Schedule I chartered bank letter of credit.
4607. Cash and securities loans with other counterparties
         (1)     When a cash or securities loan is between a Dealer Member and a party to which neither section
                 4605 nor 4606 applies, a Dealer Member must comply with subsections 4607(2) and 4607(3).
         (2)     Securities pledged as collateral must:
                 (i)     be held by:
                         (a)     the Dealer Member in segregation,
                         (b)     an acceptable clearing corporation, or
                         (c)     a bank or trust company that is either an acceptable institution or an acceptable
                                 counterparty under an escrow agreement. The escrow agreement must be between
                                 the Dealer Member and the depository, institution, or counterparty and must be in a
                                 form acceptable to the Corporation,
                 (ii)    either:
                         (a)     be securities with a margin rate of 5% or less, or
                         (b)     be preferred shares or debt securities, convertible into common shares of the class
                                 borrowed.




Series 4000 | Dealer Member Financial and Operational Rules                                                    Rule 4600
                                                              Investment Dealer and Partially Consolidated Rules

         (3)     If a Dealer Member does not comply with subsection 4607(2) or clause 4603(3)(i), its net
                 allowable assets are subject to a charge calculated in the same manner as for client account short
                 securities balances.
4608. - 4699. Reserved.




Series 4000 | Dealer Member Financial and Operational Rules                                                Rule 4600
                                                                    Investment Dealer and Partially Consolidated Rules

RULE 4700 | OPERATIONS – BUSINESS CONTINUITY AND GENERAL TRADING AND DELIVERY
STANDARDS

4701. Introduction
         (1)     Rule 4700 sets out the following requirements relating to Dealer Member operations:
                 Part A - Business continuity plan
                            [sections 4710 through 4716]
                 Part B - General trading and delivery standards applicable to all transactions
                            [sections 4750 through4761]
4702. - 4709. Reserved.

PART A - BUSINESS CONTINUITY PLAN
4710. Definitions
         (1)     The following terms have the meanings set out below when used in Part A of Rule 4700:
                   “significant business           A cybersecurity incident or any other incident that may result in a significant
                   disruption”                     impairment in client access to their security, precious metals bullion or
                                                   derivative positions or accounts or to the client’s ability to liquidate or close-
                                                   out their account positions.
4711. Introduction
         (1)     To manage risk prudently and maintain investor confidence, Dealer Members must ensure they
                 can continue to carry on business after a significant business disruption and provide clients with
                 prompt access to their assets.
4712. Creating a business continuity plan
         (1)     A Dealer Member must establish and maintain a business continuity plan.
4713. Business continuity plan procedures
         (1)     A Dealer Member’s business continuity plan must identify the procedures it will take to deal with
                 a significant business disruption.
         (2)     The procedures in subsection 4713(1) must be based on the Dealer Member’s assessment of its
                 key business functions and required levels of operation during and following a disruption.
         (3)     The procedures in subsection 4713(1) must provide reasonable assurance the Dealer Member
                 stays in business long enough to meet its obligations to its clients and capital markets
                 counterparties after a significant business disruption.
4714. Update business continuity plan
         (1)     A Dealer Member must update its business continuity plan to reflect any significant change in any
                 of its operations, structure, business, or locations.
4715. Annual review and test
         (1)     Every year:
                 (i)     a Dealer Member must review and test, and

Series 4000 | Dealer Member Financial and Operational Rules                                                                    Rule 4700
                                                                   Investment Dealer and Partially Consolidated Rules

                 (ii)    an appropriate Executive must approve,
                 its business continuity plan.
         (2)     During its annual review, a Dealer Member must make any modifications to its business
                 continuity plan that are necessary due to changes in its operations, structure, business, or
                 locations.
         (3)     The Corporation may require a qualified third party to carry out the annual review and test.
4716. Notice of disruption and invoking the business continuity plan
         (1)     Where a significant business disruption occurs, the Dealer Member must
                 (i)      notify the Corporation of this incident as soon as possible after its discovery of the
                          disruption.,
                 (ii)     include in the notice, details on the disruption and the Dealer Member’s proposed course
                          of action to address and resolve the disruption, as well as resulting consequences of the
                          disruption,
                 (iii)    indicate in the notice whether the Dealer Member intends to invoke its business continuity
                          plan, and
                 (iv)     inform the Corporation of any changes and provide timely updates on the actions set out in
                          the notice, and provide any additional information requested by the Corporation.
         (2)     When a Dealer Member invokes its business continuity plan, it must
                 (i)      notify the Corporation as soon as possible,
                 (ii)     provide details on the circumstances leading the Dealer Member to invoke its business
                          continuity plan and its proposed course of action, and
                 (iii)    inform the Corporation of any changes and provide timely updates on the actions set out in
                          the notice, and provide any additional information requested by the Corporation
4717. – 4749. Reserved.

PART B - GENERAL TRADING AND DELIVERY STANDARDS APPLICABLE TO ALL TRANSACTIONS
4750. Introduction
         (1)     Part B of Rule 4700 sets out general trading and delivery requirements applicable to all
                 transactions. Additional requirements applicable to transactions that are not cleared and settled
                 through a clearing corporation can be found in Part A of Rule 4800.
4751. Definitions
         (1)     The following terms have the meaning set out below when used in Part B of Rule 4700:
                  “acceptable trade               The broker-to-broker trade matching utility in CDS’s CDSX (defined in section
                  matching utility”               4502), or a similar system approved by the Corporation. A list of approved
                                                  acceptable trade matching utilities is updated and published as a notice by the
                                                  Corporation.
                  "depository eligible            Transactions in securities where the affirmation and settlement can be
                  transactions"                   performed through the facilities or services of CDS.

Series 4000 | Dealer Member Financial and Operational Rules                                                                Rule 4700
                                                                   Investment Dealer and Partially Consolidated Rules

                  “eligible securities”           Securities that are eligible to be deposited in the clearing corporation.
                  “good delivery                  Securities that can be transferred without restrictions and delivered to the
                  securities”                     buyer of the securities.
                  “non-exchange trade”            Any trade in a CDS eligible security (excluding new issue trades and repurchase
                                                  agreement transactions and reverse repurchase agreement transactions)
                                                  between two Dealer Members, which has not been submitted to the CDS
                                                  continuous net settlement service by a Marketplace or an acceptable foreign
                                                  marketplace. A non-exchange trade includes the dealer to dealer portion of a
                                                  jitney trade that is executed between two Dealer Members that is not reported
                                                  by a Marketplace or an acceptable foreign marketplace.
                  “participant”                   A participant in a clearing corporation’s settlement service.
                  “qualified Canadian             A trust company licensed to do business in Canada or a Canadian province with
                  trust company”                  a minimum paid up capital and surplus of $5,000,000
                  “settlement service”            A securities settlement service made available by CDS.


4752. Use of a clearing corporation
         (1)     Dealer Members who are participants in the same clearing corporation must use the clearing
                 corporation’s settlement service to settle all trades between themselves involving eligible
                 securities, unless both the delivering Dealer Member and the receiving Dealer Member agree
                 otherwise.
         (2)     If a Dealer Member is using a clearing corporation to settle a trade, it must report and settle the
                 trade in accordance with the requirements set out in Part B of Rule 4700 and the clearing
                 corporation’s rules and procedures.
         (3)     If a Dealer Member is not using a clearing corporation to settle a trade it must report and settle
                 the trade in accordance with the requirements set out in Part B of Rule 4700 and Part A of Rule
                 4800.
4753. Use of a trade matching utility
         (1)     For each non-exchange trade, involving CDS eligible securities, executed by a Dealer Member with
                 another Dealer Member, the Dealer Member must at or before 6 p.m. on the day the trade was
                 executed:
                 (i)     enter the trade into an acceptable trade matching utility, or
                 (ii)    accept or reject any trade entered into an acceptable trade matching utility by another
                         Dealer Member.
4754. Trade classification where a Dealer Member enters a trade into the matching utility
         (1)     If a Dealer Member enters a trade into an acceptable trade matching utility under clause
                 4753(1)(i), the trade is considered for each dealer trade counterparty to be a compliant trade,
                 a “don’t know” (DK) trade or a non-compliant trade according to the following table:




Series 4000 | Dealer Member Financial and Operational Rules                                                                   Rule 4700
                                                                                        Investment Dealer and Partially Consolidated Rules


                                                                                                      Action of Dealer Member

                                                                               Enter trade at or before 6 p.m.    Enter trade after 6 p.m.
                                                   Enter trade at or before 6 Dealer Member compliant trade       Dealer Member non-compliant
                                                   p.m.                       Other Dealer Member compliant       trade
                                                                              trade                               Other Dealer Member compliant
                                                                                                                  trade
                                                   Accept trade at or before   Dealer Member compliant trade
                                                   6 p.m.                      Other Dealer Member compliant
                                                                               trade
                                                   Enter or accept trade       Dealer Member compliant trade      Dealer Member non-compliant
                   Action of other Dealer Member




                                                   after 6 p.m.                Other Dealer Member                trade
                                                                               non-compliant trade                Other Dealer Member
                                                                                                                  non-compliant trade
                                                   Reject trade at or before   Dealer Member don’t know or DK
                                                   6 p.m.                      trade
                                                                               Other Dealer Member don’t know
                                                                               or DK trade
                                                   Reject trade after 6 p.m.   Dealer Member don’t know or DK     Dealer Member non-compliant
                                                                               trade                              trade
                                                                               Other Dealer Member                Other Dealer Member don’t know
                                                                               non-compliant trade                or DK trade
                                                   No action                   Dealer Member compliant trade      Dealer Member non-compliant
                                                                               Other Dealer Member                trade
                                                                               non-compliant trade                Other Dealer Member
                                                                                                                  non-compliant trade

4755. Trade classification where a Dealer Member does not enter a trade into the matching utility
         (1)     If a Dealer Member accepts or rejects a trade entered into an acceptable trade matching utility by
                 another Dealer Member under clause 4753(1)(ii) or takes no action on a trade entered into an
                 acceptable trade matching utility by another Dealer Member, the trade is considered for each
                 dealer trade counterparty to be a compliant trade, a “don’t know” (DK) trade or a non-compliant
                 trade according to the following table:
                                                                                                   Action of other Dealer Member
                                                                                Enter trade at or before 6 p.m.    Enter trade after 6 p.m.
                                                    Accept at or before         Dealer Member compliant trade
                                                    6 p.m.                      Other Dealer Member compliant
                           Action of Dealer




                                                                                trade
                                                    Accept after 6 p.m.         Dealer Member non-compliant        Dealer Member non-compliant
                                                                                trade                              trade
                                                                                Other Dealer Member compliant      Other Dealer Member
                                                                                trade                              non-compliant trade


Series 4000 | Dealer Member Financial and Operational Rules                                                                                   Rule 4700
                                                                      Investment Dealer and Partially Consolidated Rules

                                                                                 Action of other Dealer Member
                                                              Enter trade at or before 6 p.m.    Enter trade after 6 p.m.
                           Reject at or before                Dealer Member don’t know or
                           6 p.m.                             DK trade
                                                              Other Dealer Member don’t
                                                              know or DK trade
                           Reject after 6 p.m.                Dealer Member non-compliant        Dealer Member don’t know or
                                                              trade                              DK trade
                                                              Other Dealer Member don’t          Other Dealer Member
                                                              know or DK trade                   non-compliant trade
                           No action                          Dealer Member non-compliant        Dealer Member non-compliant
                                                              trade                              trade
                                                              Other Dealer Member compliant      Other Dealer Member non-
                                                              trade                              compliant trade

4756. Trade matching quarterly compliant trade percentage
         (1)     The quarterly compliant trade percentage for a Dealer Member is determined by dividing the sum
                 of the quarter’s compliant trades (which does not include “don’t know” trades) by the total
                 number of non-exchange trades that are executed during the quarter by the Dealer Member with
                 other Dealer Members.
         (2)     Where the Dealer Member’s quarterly compliant trade percentage is less than 90% for more than
                 two consecutive quarters, the Corporation may pursue disciplinary action.
4757. Payment or delivery through client settlement agent
         (1)     For any arrangement where the payment of securities purchased or delivery of securities sold is
                 to be made to or through a client’s settlement agent, all of the following procedures must be
                 followed:
                 (i)     the Dealer Member receives from the client prior to or at the time of accepting the order
                         the name and address of the settlement agent and account number of the client on file
                         with the settlement agent. Where settlement is made through a depository offering an
                         identification number system for the clients of settlement agents of the depository, the
                         Dealer Member must have the client identification number prior to or at the time of
                         accepting the order and use the number in the settlement of the trade,
                 (ii)    each order accepted from the client is identified as either a delivery or receipt against
                         payment trade,
                 (iii)   the Dealer Member provides to the client a confirmation according to Rule 3800,
                 (iv)    the Dealer Member has obtained an agreement from the client stating that the client will:
                         (a)     promptly provide its settlement agent with instructions regarding the transaction
                                 following its receipt of the transaction confirmation from the Dealer Member, or the
                                 relevant date and information as to each execution from the Dealer Member, relating
                                 to such order (even though such execution represents the purchase or sale of only a
                                 part of the order), and


Series 4000 | Dealer Member Financial and Operational Rules                                                                 Rule 4700
                                                                Investment Dealer and Partially Consolidated Rules

                         (b)     ensure that its settlement agent affirms the transaction no later than the end of the
                                 day on the date of execution of the trade to which the confirmation relates,


                         and
                 (v)     the client and its settlement agent must use the facilities or services of CDS for the
                         affirmation and settlement of all depository eligible transactions through such facilities or
                         services including book based or certificated settlement. This clause 4757(1)(v) applies only
                         to transactions:
                         (a)     to be settled in Canada, and
                         (b)     where both the Dealer Member and the settlement agent are participants of CDS or
                                 the same facilities or services of CDS required in respect of the trade.
4758. Early registration of securities
         (1)     Prior to the receipt of payment, a Dealer Member must not register any security, with the
                 exception of a new issue on a date before the close date, in the name of the client or his or her
                 nominee. A Dealer Member’s absorption of bank or other charges incurred by a client or his or
                 her nominee for the registration of a security will be considered an infraction of this requirement.
         (2)     After the receipt of payment, a Dealer Member may absorb transfer fees incurred in the transfer
                 of a security according to a client's instructions.
         (3)     Despite subsection 4758(1), a Dealer Member may register an eligible security in the name of, or
                 in the name of a nominee of, a self-administered registered retirement savings plan registered
                 under the Income Tax Act (Canada) before payment is received if, before the securities are
                 registered, a Dealer Member obtains an unconditional guarantee from the trust company
                 administering the plan.
4759. Repurchase agreement or reverse repurchase agreement transactions and option granting
      transactions with clients
         (1)     Before entering into the following transactions a Dealer Member must have in writing all terms
                 relevant to the transaction on the face of the contract or if necessary, on an additional page
                 attached to the contract provided those terms are referred to on the face of the contract, with a
                 client:
                 (i)     an agreement to purchase or repurchase a security,
                 (ii)    an agreement to sell or resell a security, or
                 (iii)   the granting of a put, call or similar option involving a security.
4760. When issued trading
         (1)     Unless otherwise provided by the Corporation or the parties to the trade agree otherwise:
                 (i)     all when issued trades made on or before the trading day before the anticipated date of
                         issue of the security must be settled on the anticipated date of issue of such security,
                 (ii)    all when issued trades made after the trading day before the anticipated date of issue of
                         the security must be settled on the first settlement day after the trade date, and



Series 4000 | Dealer Member Financial and Operational Rules                                                     Rule 4700
                                                              Investment Dealer and Partially Consolidated Rules

                 (iii)   if the security has not been issued on the settlement date in clause 4760(1)(i) or 4760(1)(ii),
                         such trades must be settled on the date that the security is actually issued.
4761. Tax payments
         (1)     A selling Dealer Member must pay, or certify payment of, taxes required for a buying Dealer
                 Member to transfer the securities purchased to nominee name, except in the situation where
                 there is a register in the buying Dealer Member’s province, and the buying Dealer Member
                 chooses to transfer the securities to a register outside that province.
4762. – 4799. Reserved.




Series 4000 | Dealer Member Financial and Operational Rules                                                     Rule 4700
                                                              Investment Dealer and Partially Consolidated Rules

RULE 4800 | OPERATIONS – TRADING AND DELIVERY STANDARDS FOR NON-CENTRALLY CLEARED
TRANSACTIONS, ACCOUNT TRANSFERS AND BULK ACCOUNT MOVEMENTS

4801. Introduction
         (1)     Rule 4800 sets out the following requirements relating to Dealer Member operations:
                 Part A - Trading and delivery standards applicable to transactions that are not cleared and settled
                          through a clearing corporation:
                            Part A.1 - Fixed income transactions
                                         [sections 4803 through 4806]
                            Part A.2 - Stock transactions
                                         [sections 4807 through 4809]
                            Part A.3 - Buy-in transactions
                                         [section 4810]
                 Part B - Account transfers and bulk account movements
                            Part B.1 - Account Transfers
                                         [sections 4852 through 4865]
                            Part B.2 - Bulk Account Movements
                                         [section 4866].

PART A - TRADING AND DELIVERY STANDARDS APPLICABLE TO TRANSACTIONS THAT ARE NOT CLEARED AND
       SETTLED THROUGH A CLEARING CORPORATION.
4802. Introduction
         (1)     Part A of Rule 4800 sets out additional requirements applicable to transactions that are not
                 cleared and settled through a clearing corporation.

PART A.1 – FIXED INCOME TRANSACTIONS
4803. Fixed income accrued interest
         (1)     All securities having interest payable as a fixed obligation, except securities in sale and repurchase
                 agreement transactions, must be conducted on an accrued interest basis until maturity or a
                 default in such payment either occurs or is announced by the debtor, whichever is the earlier
                 event. The Corporation may set aside this requirement in specific cases where common practice
                 and expediency prompt such action and will give due notice to all Dealer Members in such cases.
         (2)     Prior to actual default or announcement by the debtor as specified in subsection 4803(1), sales
                 made of securities but undelivered at the time of default or such announcement, must be
                 conducted on an accrued interest basis under the terms of the original transaction.
         (3)     Subsequent to default or announcement by the debtor as specified in subsection 4803(1), the
                 securities must be handled on a flat basis with all matured and unpaid coupons attached, until
                 such time as all arrears of interest have been paid and one current coupon has been paid when
                 due.



Series 4000 | Dealer Member Financial and Operational Rules                                                    Rule 4800
                                                              Investment Dealer and Partially Consolidated Rules

         (4)     Transactions in bonds having coupons payable out of income, if and when earned, must take
                 place on a flat basis. Any matured and unpaid income coupons must be attached. Income bonds
                 that have been called for redemption must continue to be traded on a flat basis even after the
                 call date has been published.
         (5)     Transactions in bonds where an issuer has been subject to reorganization or capital adjustment
                 that results in the bondholders receiving as a bonus or otherwise, certain stock or scrip, such
                 transactions must be ex stock or scrip, unless otherwise stated at the time the trade is made.
                 Such bonds must be traded on a flat basis until such time as all arrears have been paid and one
                 current coupon has been paid when due, except where the Corporation has determined
                 otherwise.
         (6)     Accrued interest on trades in interest paying instruments that pay interest monthly and
                 compound interest monthly must be zero, if the value date of the trade is an interest payment
                 date. Otherwise, the accrued interest on such trades must be calculated by multiplying the face
                 amount of the instrument by the interest rate of the instrument and the number of days between
                 the value date of the trade and the last interest payment date prior to the value date of the trade
                 and dividing the result by twelve multiplied by the number of days between the next interest
                 payment date after the value date of the trade and the last interest payment date prior to the
                 value date of the trade.
         (7)     For bonds or debentures that are only available in registered form, transactions made on the day
                 of a regular interest payment and up to one business day before the closing of the transfer
                 agent’s books for the next interest payment, both days inclusive, will be on an “and interest”
                 basis. The full amount of such interest payment must be deducted by the seller after the
                 calculation of interest on the regular delivery basis, unless delivery is completed to the buyer by
                 12 p.m. at a transfer point on the date of the closing of the transfer agent’s books for a regular
                 interest payment.
         (8)     For bonds or debentures that are only available in registered form, transactions from the day of
                 closing of the transfer agent’s books up to and including one business day before a regular
                 interest payment must be "less interest" from settlement date to the regular interest payment
                 date.
         (9)     Where interest on a transaction involves an amount greater than that represented by the half-
                 yearly coupon, interest is to be calculated on the basis of the full amount of the coupon less one
                 or two days, as the case may be.
4804. Fixed income trading units
         (1)     Section 4804 applies to all transactions between Dealer Members regardless of the Districts the
                 Dealer Members are in.
         (2)     In section 4804 “trading units” is defined as follows:
                 (i)     Government of Canada
                         (a)     $250,000 par value for Government of Canada direct obligations and Government of
                                 Canada guaranteed obligations having an unexpired term of less than one year to
                                 maturity (or to the earliest call date, where the transaction is completed at a
                                 premium),

Series 4000 | Dealer Member Financial and Operational Rules                                                  Rule 4800
                                                              Investment Dealer and Partially Consolidated Rules

                         (b)     $100,000 par value for Government of Canada direct obligations and Government of
                                 Canada guaranteed obligations having an unexpired term of one year or longer but
                                 three years or less to maturity (or to the earliest call date, where the transaction is
                                 completed at a premium),
                         (c)     $100,000 par value for Government of Canada direct obligations and Government of
                                 Canada guaranteed obligations having an unexpired term to maturity of longer than
                                 three years (where the bond is traded at a premium, the earliest call date shall be
                                 treated as the maturity date).
                 (ii)    Province of Canada
                         (a)     $25,000 par value for bonds, debentures and other obligations of or guaranteed by a
                                 province in Canada.
                 (iii)   Other Bonds and Debentures
                         (a)     $25,000 par value for bonds and non-convertible debentures (other than
                                 Government of Canada direct obligations and Government of Canada guaranteed
                                 obligations and bonds, debentures and other obligations of or guaranteed by a
                                 province in Canada) that were not issued with attached stock warrants, rights or
                                 other attachments,
                         (b)     $5,000 par value for bonds, convertible debentures or debentures (other than
                                 Government of Canada direct obligations and Government of Canada guaranteed
                                 obligations and bonds, debentures and other obligations of or guaranteed by a
                                 province in Canada) that were issued with attached stock warrants, rights or other
                                 attachments.
         (3)     A Dealer Member calling a market must trade trading units if called upon to trade, unless
                 prefixed by some qualifying phrase. Any amount less than one trading unit will be considered as
                 an “odd lot”.
         (4)     Any Dealer Member asking the size of a stated market must be prepared to buy or sell at least a
                 trading unit at the price quoted if immediately requested to do so by the Dealer Member calling
                 the market.
         (5)     Any Dealer Member who has been requested to call a market has the option to trade an odd lot
                 at the called market (if so requested) or to adjust his market to compensate for the smaller
                 amount involved.
4805. Fixed income delivery
         (1)     In section 4805 “regular delivery” is defined as:
                 (i)     Government of Canada
                         (a)     The same day as the transaction date for Government of Canada Treasury Bills.
                         (b)     The first business day after the transaction date for Government of Canada Bonds
                                 and Government of Canada Guaranteed Bonds (except Treasury Bills) having an
                                 unexpired term to maturity of three years or less (or to the earliest call date where a
                                 transaction is completed at a premium). Any accrued interest must be stopped on the
                                 first business day after the transaction date.


Series 4000 | Dealer Member Financial and Operational Rules                                                      Rule 4800
                                                              Investment Dealer and Partially Consolidated Rules

                         (c)     The first business day after the transaction date for Government of Canada Bonds
                                 and Government of Canada Guaranteed Bonds having an unexpired term to maturity
                                 of longer than three years (where such a bond is traded at a premium the earliest call
                                 date shall be treated as the maturity date). Any accrued interest must be stopped on
                                 the first business day after the transaction date.
                 (ii)    Province of Canada
                         (a)     The first business day after the transaction date for all provincial bonds or
                                 debentures. Any accrued interest must be stopped on the first business day after the
                                 transaction date.
                 (iii)   Other Bonds and Debentures
                          (a) The first business day after the transaction date for all municipal, corporation and
                              other bonds or debentures (other than Government of Canada and Province of
                              Canada treasury bills, bonds or debentures), and other certificates of indebtedness
                              including mortgage-backed securities. Any accrued interest must be stopped on the
                              first business day after the transaction date.
         (2)     All trades are to be considered for regular delivery, unless otherwise agreed to in writing by all of
                 the parties to a transaction at the time of the transaction.
         (3)     For a deal involving the sale or purchase of more than one maturity, each maturity must be
                 treated as a separate transaction. No contingent (all or none) dealings are permitted.
         (4)     New issues delivery
                 (i)     The regular delivery requirements are not intended to interfere in any way with the
                         common practice of transactions between Dealer Members in new issues during the period
                         of primary distribution on an "accrued interest to delivery" basis. However, the regular
                         delivery requirements will come into effect on the appropriate number of business days
                         prior to the new issue being first available for physical delivery.
                 (ii)    Where a new issue delivery is made against payment outside of the points fixed for the
                         initial syndicate delivery of the issue, additional accrued interest must be charged from the
                         delivery date at the initial syndicate delivery point of the new issue, according to the length
                         of time normally required for delivery to the locality in which the delivery is made.
                 (iii)   For a mortgage-backed security transaction made during the period from the first business
                         day of the month to the fourth business day of the month, inclusive, delivery must take
                         place on or after the fifth business day of the month.
         (5)      Physical Delivery
                  (i)     For any transaction between Dealer Members where physical delivery is to be made, the
                          seller must complete the delivery before close of business on settlement date.
                  (ii)    For any transaction between Dealer Members, the seller must complete the delivery on
                          the buyer’s terms, that is the delivery is to be made by the seller free of banking or
                          shipping charges to the buyer.




Series 4000 | Dealer Member Financial and Operational Rules                                                     Rule 4800
                                                              Investment Dealer and Partially Consolidated Rules

         (6)     Good delivery
                 (i)     Securities traded by Dealer Members must be good delivery securities. Therefore, they must
                         have the necessary endorsements, guarantees or both, and meet all legal and regulatory
                         requirements so that their titles can be transferred by delivery to the buyer on settlement
                         date. The seller must obtain them and include them with the delivery.
                 (ii)    Good delivery securities may consist of bearer bonds or debentures or registered bonds or
                         debentures.
                 (iii)   For good delivery, securities that can be traded as actual certificates or as certificates of
                         deposit, delivery must be made in the form of actual certificates, unless stated otherwise at
                         the time of the transaction.
                 (iv)    For good delivery, the bonds or debentures are to be of a maximum denomination of
                         $100,000 par value, unless agreed to otherwise by the buyer.
                 (v)     For good delivery, if a power of attorney is necessary for the certificates, one power of
                         attorney for each certificate is required, unless the buyer has agreed otherwise to accept
                         an amalgamated power of attorney.
                 (vi)    For good delivery, if definitive certificates are not available interim certificates may be
                         used. However, once definitive certificates are available interim certificates may not be
                         used, unless the Dealer Members agree otherwise.
                 (vii) Good delivery securities may consist of the following, provided that is it acceptable to the
                       transfer agent:
                         (a)     bonds or debentures registered in the name of an individual, properly endorsed and
                                 with endorsement guaranteed by a Dealer Member in good standing of the
                                 Corporation or an exchange in Canada or the United States, or by a chartered bank or
                                 qualified Canadian trust company,
                         (b)     bonds or debentures registered in the name of a Dealer Member or nominee of a
                                 Dealer Member and properly endorsed,
                         (c)     bonds or debentures registered in the name of a member of an exchange in Canada
                                 or the United States and properly endorsed,
                         (d)     bonds or debentures registered in the name of a chartered bank or qualified
                                 Canadian trust company or the nominee of a chartered bank or qualified trust
                                 company and properly endorsed.
         (7)     Not good delivery
                 (i)     A mutilated or torn certificate or coupon unless acceptable to the receiving Dealer
                         Member.
                 (ii)    A certificate registered in the name of a firm or corporation that has made an assignment
                         for the benefit of creditors or has been declared bankrupt.
                 (iii)   A certificate signed by a trustee or administrator unless accompanied by sufficient evidence
                         of authority to sign.
                 (iv)    A certificate with documents attached other than a registered bond of an issue available in
                         registered form only, with completed power of attorney to transfer attached. (One power



Series 4000 | Dealer Member Financial and Operational Rules                                                      Rule 4800
                                                              Investment Dealer and Partially Consolidated Rules

                         of attorney for each certificate or an amalgamated power of attorney if acceptable to
                         receiving broker or dealer).
                 (v)     A certificate which has been altered or erased (other than by the transfer agent) whether
                         or not such alteration or erasure has been guaranteed.
                 (vi)    A certificate on which the assignment or substitute attorney has been altered or erased.
                 (vii) A certificate with the next maturing coupon or subsequent coupons detached unless where
                       so traded or where a certificate cheque (if for $1,000 or more) payable to the receiving
                       Dealer Member, dated no later than the date of delivery and for the amount of the coupon
                       missing, is attached to the certificate in question.
                 (viii) A bond or debenture, registered as to principal only, which after being transferred to
                        bearer, does not bear the stamp and signature of the trustee.
                 (ix)    A registered bond or debenture unless it bears a certificate that provincial tax has been
                         paid where applicable.
                 (x)     A certificate that has a stop transfer placed against it, the stop having been placed prior to
                         delivery being made to the receiving dealer or broker.
         (8)     Prior to notice of call
                 (i)     Sales or purchases of securities prior to notice of call in part but not in full and undelivered
                         on date of such notice, must be completed on the basis of the original transaction. Date of
                         notice is the date of the notice of call irrespective of the date of publication of such notice.
                         Called securities do not constitute good delivery unless the transaction is so designated at
                         its inception.
                 (ii)    Sales or purchases of securities prior to notice of call in full and undelivered at time of such
                         notice must be completed on the terms of the original transaction.
4806. Fixed income redemption payment
         (1)     A Dealer Member must not pay to a client regarding any maturity the redemption price or other
                 amount due on redemption of such securities where the price or amount exceeds $100,000,
                 unless:
                 (i)     the Dealer Member has first received an amount equal to such price or other amount from
                         the issuer or its agent by cheque certified by or accepted without qualification by a
                         chartered bank, or
                 (ii)    the Dealer Member has first received or is credited an amount equal to such price or other
                         amount through the facilities of CDS or Depository Trust Company.

PART A.2 – STOCK TRANSACTIONS
4807. Stock trading units
         (1)     Section 4807 applies to all transactions between Dealer Members regardless of the Districts the
                 Dealer Members are in.
         (2)     In section 4807 “trading units” is defined as follows:
                 (i)     Common and preferred shares not listed on an exchange in Canada or the United States:
                         (a)     in lots of 500 shares, if market price per share is below $1,

Series 4000 | Dealer Member Financial and Operational Rules                                                       Rule 4800
                                                               Investment Dealer and Partially Consolidated Rules

                         (b)     in lots of 100 shares, if market price per share is at $1 and below $100, or
                         (c)     in lots of 50 shares, if market price per share is at $100 or above.
         (3)     A Dealer Member calling a market shall be obliged to trade trading units if called upon to trade,
                 unless prefixed by some qualifying phrase. Any amount less than one trading unit will be
                 considered as an “odd lot”.
         (4)     Any Dealer Member asking the size of a stated market must be prepared to buy or sell at least a
                 trading unit at the price quoted if immediately requested to do so by the Dealer Member calling
                 the market.
         (5)     Any Dealer Member that has been requested to call a market has the option to trade an odd lot at
                 the called market (if so requested) or to adjust its market to compensate for the smaller amount
                 involved.
4808. Stock delivery
         (1)     All trades are to be considered for regular delivery (defined in subsection 4808(2)), unless
                 otherwise agreed to in writing by the parties to a transaction at the time of the transaction.
         (2)     In section 4808 “regular delivery” is defined as:
                 (i)     Exchange-listed shares
                         (a)     The settlement date generally accepted according to industry practice for the shares
                                 in the market in which the transaction occurs, including foreign jurisdictions.
                 (ii)    Unlisted registered shares
                         (a)     The settlement date generally accepted according to industry practice for the shares
                                 in the market in which the transaction occurs, including foreign jurisdictions.
                         (b)     For transactions between Dealer Members in shares that occur on record date, the
                                 shares must be traded ex dividend, ex rights, or ex payments.
                         (c)     For transactions between Dealer Members in shares that are not ex dividend, ex
                                 rights, or ex payments at the time the transaction occurs and delivery is not
                                 completed before twelve o'clock noon (12 p.m.) at a transfer point on the date of the
                                 closing of the transfer agent’s books, the seller is responsible to the buyer for the
                                 payment of such dividends or payments, and delivery of such rights, as may be
                                 involved, on their due dates. For the purposes of this sub-clause 4808(2)(ii)(c), where
                                 the record date falls on a Saturday or other non-business day, the business day prior
                                 to the record date is to be treated as the effective record date.
         (3)     New issues delivery
                 (i)     The regular delivery requirements in subsection 4808(2) are not intended to interfere in
                         any way with the common practice of dealing in new issues during the period of primary
                         distribution. However, the regular delivery requirements will come into effect on the
                         appropriate number of business days prior to the new issue being first available for physical
                         delivery.
         (4)     Physical Delivery
                 (i)     For any transaction between Dealer Members where physical delivery is to be made, the
                         seller must complete the delivery before close of business on settlement date.

Series 4000 | Dealer Member Financial and Operational Rules                                                     Rule 4800
                                                              Investment Dealer and Partially Consolidated Rules

                 (ii)     For any transaction between Dealer Members, the seller must complete the delivery on the
                          buyer’s terms, that is the delivery is to be made by the seller free of banking or shipping
                          charges to the buyer.
         (5)     Good delivery
                 (i)     Securities traded by Dealer Members must be good delivery securities. Therefore, they must
                         have the necessary endorsements, guarantees or both, and meet all legal and regulatory
                         requirements so that their titles can be transferred by delivery to the buyer on settlement
                         date. The seller must obtain them and include them with the delivery.
                 (ii)    Certificates registered in the name of:
                         (a)     an individual, must be endorsed by the registered holder in exactly the same manner
                                 as registered and the endorsement guaranteed by a Dealer Member or by a member
                                 of an exchange in Canada or the United States or by a chartered bank or qualified
                                 Canadian trust company. Where the endorsement does not exactly correspond to the
                                 registration shown on the face of the certificate, a certification by a Dealer Member,
                                 a member of an exchange in Canada or the United States, a chartered bank or a
                                 qualified Canadian trust company that the two signatures are the same person’s is
                                 required,
                         (b)     a Dealer Member or a member of an exchange in Canada or the United States or a
                                 nominee of either and properly endorsed,
                         (c)     a chartered bank or qualified Canadian trust company or the nominee of a chartered
                                 bank or qualified Canadian trust company and properly endorsed by a Dealer
                                 Member, or
                         (d)     any other manner providing it is properly endorsed and the endorsement is
                                 guaranteed by a Dealer Member or by a member of an exchange in Canada or the
                                 United States or by a chartered bank or qualified Canadian trust company.
                 (iii)   Certificates in board lot denominations (or less) as required by the exchange on which the
                         stock is traded. Unlisted stocks should also be in denominations similar to listed stocks in
                         the same category and price range.
         (6)     Not good delivery
                 (i)     A mutilated or torn certificate or coupon unless acceptable to receiving broker or dealer.
                 (ii)    A certificate registered in the name of a firm or corporation that has made an assignment
                         for the benefit of creditors or has been declared bankrupt.
                 (iii)   A certificate signed by a trustee or administrator unless accompanied by sufficient evidence
                         of authority to sign.
                 (iv)    A certificate with documents attached other than a registered bond of an issue available in
                         registered form only, with completed power of attorney to transfer attached. (One power
                         of attorney for each certificate or an amalgamated power of attorney if acceptable to
                         receiving broker or dealer).
                 (v)     A certificate that has been altered or erased (other than by the transfer agent) whether or
                         not such alteration or erasure has been guaranteed.
                 (vi)    A certificate on which the assignment or substitute attorney has been altered or erased.


Series 4000 | Dealer Member Financial and Operational Rules                                                    Rule 4800
                                                              Investment Dealer and Partially Consolidated Rules

                 (vii) A registered stock unless it bears a certificate that provincial tax has been paid where
                       applicable.
                 (viii) A certificate that has a stop transfer placed against it, the stop having been placed prior to
                        delivery being made to the receiving dealer or broker.
         (7)     Prior to notice of call
                 (i)     Sales or purchases of securities prior to notice of call in part but not in full and undelivered
                         on date of such notice, must be completed on the basis of the original transaction. Date of
                         notice is the date of the notice of call irrespective of the date of publication of such notice.
                         Called securities do not constitute good delivery unless the transaction is so designated at
                         its inception.
                 (ii)    Sales or purchases of securities prior to notice of call in full and undelivered at time of such
                         notice must be completed on the terms of the original transaction.
4809. Stock dividend claims
         (1)     No Dealer Member shall make a certificate claim for dividends against another Dealer Member if
                 the amount of such claim would be $5.00 or less.

PART A.3 - BUY-IN TRANSACTIONS
4810. Buy-ins
         (1)     Buy-ins must be made within the times, using the notices prescribed, and according to
                 Corporation requirements. For the purposes of clauses 4810(1)(i) through 4810(1)(iv) a "regular
                 delivery transaction" is deemed to have taken place once the Dealer Members involved have
                 agreed on a price.
                 (i)     For transactions between Dealer Members where the seller does not advise the buyer
                         about the delivery by 11:30 a.m. on the second business day after a regular delivery
                         transaction:
                         (a)     The buyer may at his or her option buy-in the securities, where the buyer intends to
                                 buy-in the securities, the buyer must give written notice to the seller and to the
                                 Corporation on that day, or any subsequent business day, prior to 3:30 p.m., of his or
                                 her intention to buy-in for cash on the second business day after the original notice.
                         (b)     The notice is deemed to automatically renew itself from business day to business day
                                 from 11:30 a.m. until closing until the transaction is finally completed.
                         (c)     Where the buy-in is not executed on the second business day after the original
                                 notice, the seller has the privilege of advising the buyer each subsequent day before
                                 11:30 a.m. of his or her ability, and intention, to make either whole or partial delivery
                                 on that day.
                 (ii)    Any Dealer Member who is bought-in may demand evidence that a bona fide transaction
                         has taken place involving the delivery of the bought-in securities. The Dealer Member who
                         is bought-in has the right, to deliver such part of his or her commitment according to clause
                         4810(1)(i) and must complete any such delivery to the nearest $1,000 par value, or stock
                         trading unit.



Series 4000 | Dealer Member Financial and Operational Rules                                                       Rule 4800
                                                                    Investment Dealer and Partially Consolidated Rules

                 (iii)   The Corporation has the authority to postpone the execution of a buy-in from day to day,
                         and to combine buy-ins in the same security, and to decide any dispute arising from the
                         execution of the buy-in, and its decision is final and binding.
                 (iv)    When a buy-in has been completed the buyer must submit to the seller a statement of
                         account showing:
                         (a)     as credits, the amount originally contracted for as payment for the securities, and
                         (b)     as debits, the amount paid on buy-in, the cost of the buyer's communication charges
                                 relative to the buy-in, and any bank or shipping charges incurred.
                         Where there is a credit balance remaining, the buyer must pay this amount to the seller,
                         and where there is a debit balance remaining, the seller must pay this amount to the buyer.
4811. – 4849. Reserved.

PART B - ACCOUNT TRANSFERS AND BULK ACCOUNT MOVEMENTS
4850. Introduction
         (1)     Part B.1 of Rule 4800 describes the Corporation’s requirements for transferring accounts between
                 Dealer Members to ensure these transfers are completed promptly.
         (2)     Part B.2 of Rule 4800 describes the Corporation’s exemption authority with regards to bulk
                 account movements.
4851. Definitions
         (1)     The following terms have the meaning set out below when used in Part B of Rule 4800:
                  “account transfer”                A client account transfer, at the request of or with the authority of the client,
                                                    from one Dealer Member to another Dealer Member.
                  “delivering Dealer                The Dealer Member from which the client account is being transferred or
                  Member”                           moved.
                  “partial account”                 Less than the total assets and balances in a client account held by a delivering
                                                    Dealer Member.
                  “receiving Dealer                 The Dealer Member to which the client account is being transferred or moved.
                  Member”
                  “recognized depository”           A Corporation recognized clearing corporation or depository that is
                                                    considered an acceptable securities location.


PART B.1 - ACCOUNT TRANSFERS
4852. Transferring a full or partial account
         (1)     A Dealer Member transferring a full or partial account must comply with Part B.1 of Rule 4800.
4853. Transfer through a recognized depository
         (1)     Whenever possible, a Dealer Member transferring a client account must transfer that account
                 through a recognized depository.



Series 4000 | Dealer Member Financial and Operational Rules                                                                   Rule 4800
                                                              Investment Dealer and Partially Consolidated Rules

4854. Communications between Dealer Members
         (1)     Communications between Dealer Members must take place by electronic delivery through CDS’s
                 account transfer facility, unless both Dealer Members agree otherwise.
         (2)     A Dealer Member must pay its costs for delivering or receiving electronic communications done
                 under Part B.1 of Rule 4800.
         (3)     A Dealer Member must select, implement, and maintain appropriate security measures to protect
                 its electronically delivered communications.
         (4)     Dealer Member acknowledgement and indemnification:
                 (i)     a Dealer Member acknowledges that an electronically delivered communication it sends
                         will be relied on by the Dealer Member receiving it,
                 (ii)    a Dealer Member must indemnify and save harmless other Dealer Members from any
                         claims, losses, damages, liabilities or expenses the other Dealer Members suffer as a result
                         of relying on its unauthorized, inaccurate, or incomplete electronic communication.
4855. Receiving Dealer Member - responsibilities for documents
         (1)     If a receiving Dealer Member receives a request from a client to accept an account, it must obtain
                 written authorization from the client to transfer the account.
         (2)     After the client gives written authorization to the receiving Dealer Member, the receiving Dealer
                 Member must:
                 (i)     promptly send a request for transfer (using an account transfer authorization form
                         approved by the Corporation) through CDS to the delivering Dealer Member, and
                 (ii)    keep the original written account transfer authorization form on file.
         (3)     The receiving Dealer Member must ensure that the forms or documents required to transfer
                 accounts are completed and available on the same day as the request for transfer is delivered.
4856. Delivering Dealer Member - response to request for transfer
         (1)     When it receives the request for transfer, the delivering Dealer Member must either:
                 (i)     deliver to the receiving Dealer Member, by the specified return date, the asset list for the
                         client account being transferred, or
                 (ii)    reject the request for transfer if the client account information is unknown to the delivering
                         Dealer Member or is incomplete or incorrect.
         (2)     The return date in clause 4856(1)(i) must be no later than two clearing days after the date that
                 the delivering Dealer Member received the request for transfer.
4857. Asset transfer
         (1)     Within one clearing day after the specified return date the delivering Dealer Member must
                 commence, or cause CDS’s account transfer facility to implement automatically, the transfer of
                 the assets through CDS.
         (2)     Any assets that cannot be transferred through a recognized depository must be settled:
                 (i)     over-the-counter,
                 (ii)    by other standard industry practices, or

Series 4000 | Dealer Member Financial and Operational Rules                                                     Rule 4800
                                                              Investment Dealer and Partially Consolidated Rules

                 (iii)   by other appropriate means agreed between the receiving Dealer Member and the
                         delivering Dealer Member.
                 The time limits in subsection 4857(1) apply.
4858. Transfer impediment
         (1)     If there is an impediment to the requested transfer of an account asset, the delivering Dealer
                 Member must promptly notify the receiving Dealer Member, identifying the asset and the reason
                 for the inability to deliver.
         (2)     The receiving Dealer Member must get client instructions or directions concerning the asset, and
                 deliver them to the delivering Dealer Member.
         (3)     The balance of the client’s assets must be transferred according to Part B.1 of Rule 4800.
4859. Failure to settle
         (1)     If the delivering Dealer Member fails to settle an asset transfer in a client account within 10
                 clearing days of receipt of the request for transfer, the receiving Dealer Member may complete
                 the account transfer, at its option, by:
                 (i)     buying-in the unsettled position in accordance with section 4810,
                 (ii)    lending the security to the delivering Dealer Member through a recognized depository and
                         simultaneously transferring the same security into the client account, or
                 (iii)   making other mutually agreed arrangements with the delivering Dealer Member so that the
                         account transfer can be considered completed.
         (2)     Any loan in clause 4859(1)(ii) must be marked to market and the assets will be considered
                 delivered to the receiving Dealer Member to settle the account transfer.
4860. Non-certificated mutual funds
         (1)     Non-certificated mutual fund securities are considered transferred when the delivering Dealer
                 Member delivers to the receiving Dealer Member:
                 (i)     a completed mutual fund transfer form, and
                 (ii)    a completed and signed power of attorney, or
                 (iii)   by entry of transfer instructions in the electronic account transfer facility of FundSERV Inc.
4861. Interest or dividend receipt balances
         (1)     Interest or dividend receivable balances must be settled promptly between a delivering Dealer
                 Member and receiving Dealer Member. Despite any failure to settle these balances, a Dealer
                 Member must comply with the account transfer procedures in Part B.1 of Rule 4800.
4862. Margin
         (1)     A Dealer Member must not accept an account transfer from another Dealer Member if the
                 account has a margin deficiency.
         (2)     Subsection 4862(1) does not apply if at the account transfer time the receiving Dealer Member
                 has sufficient funds or collateral to the client’s credit available to cover the account’s margin
                 deficiency.



Series 4000 | Dealer Member Financial and Operational Rules                                                      Rule 4800
                                                              Investment Dealer and Partially Consolidated Rules

4863. Responsibility for margining account
         (1)     The receiving Dealer Member assumes the responsibility for the margining of transferred account
                 money balances and assets on the date or dates the money balances or assets are received.
4864. Fees and charges
         (1)     Before or at the time of account transfer, a delivering Dealer Member may deduct any fee or
                 charge on the account in accordance with the delivering Dealer Member’s current published fee
                 and charge schedule.
4865. Corporation exemption
         (1)     The Corporation may exempt a Dealer Member from the requirements of Part B.1 of Rule 4800 if
                 the Corporation is satisfied that to do so would not prejudice the interests of the Dealer Member,
                 its clients, or the public.
         (2)     In granting an exemption under subsection 4865(1), the Corporation may impose any terms and
                 conditions it considers necessary.
PART B.2 - BULK ACCOUNT MOVEMENTS
4866. Bulk account movements exemption
         (1)     In the event of a bulk account movement situation, where a Dealer Member is receiving in a
                 significant number of client accounts, the Corporation may grant the Dealer Member an
                 exemption from the applicable account opening requirement completion timelines.
         (2)     The Corporation will grant such exemption if it is satisfied that to do so would not prejudice the
                 interests of the Dealer Member’s clients, the public or the Dealer Member.
         (3)     In granting such an exemption under subsection 4866(1), the Corporation may impose any terms
                 and conditions it considers necessary.
4867. – 4899. Reserved.




Series 4000 | Dealer Member Financial and Operational Rules                                                   Rule 4800
                                                              Investment Dealer and Partially Consolidated Rules

RULE 4900 | OTHER INTERNAL CONTROL REQUIREMENTS – DERIVATIVES RISK MANAGEMENT

4901. Introduction
         (1)     Rule 4900 sets out the internal control requirements for derivative risk management.
4902. - 4909. Reserved.

DERIVATIVES RISK MANAGEMENT
4910. Introduction
         (1)     A Dealer Member must have an independent risk management function to:
                 (i)     manage the risks resulting from its use of derivatives, which include listed derivatives and
                         over-the-counter derivatives,
                 (ii)    ensure that an appropriate Executive that reports to the board of directors understands all
                         risks, and
                 (iii)   ensure that its risk adjusted capital is calculated properly.
4911. Reserved.
4912. Risk management process
         (1)     A Dealer Member must have a risk management function with clear independence and authority
                 to ensure risk limit policies are developed and transactions and positions are monitored for
                 adherence to these policies.
         (2)     A Dealer Member must have a risk management process to identify, measure, manage, and
                 monitor risks associated with the use of derivatives.
         (3)     The risk management process has two parts:
                 (i)     An appropriate Executive must be knowledgeable of the nature and risks of all derivative
                         products used in treasury, proprietary, institutional and retail activities, and
                 (ii)    The Dealer Member’s policies and procedures must clearly outline risk management
                         guidance for derivatives activities.
           (4)     A Dealer Member’s financial accounting department must measure the Dealer Member’s
                   revenue components regularly and in sufficient detail to understand risk sources.
4913. Role of board of directors
         (1)     A Dealer Member’s board of directors or equivalent must approve policies and procedures
                 relating to significant risk management to provide reasonable assurance they are consistent with
                 the Dealer Member’s overall broader business strategies and appropriate for market conditions.
         (2)     An appropriate Executive must report at least annually to the Dealer Member’s board of directors
                 on a Dealer Member’s risk exposure.
4914. Role of an appropriate Executive
         (1)     An appropriate Executive must ensure that for derivative products:
                 (i)     The Dealer Member’s policies and procedures specifically address processing, trading,
                         monitoring and reporting cycles including:

Series 4000 | Dealer Member Financial and Operational Rules                                                     Rule 4900
                                                               Investment Dealer and Partially Consolidated Rules

                         (a)     clear responsibility lines for risk management,
                         (b)     an adequate system for measuring risk,
                         (c)     appropriate risk position limits,
                         (d)     effective internal controls, and
                         (e)     a comprehensive reporting process,
                 (ii)    if risk position limits are exceeded, there is a system to ensure that these excesses are
                         approved only by authorized employees and communicated to an appropriate Executive,
                 (iii)   all appropriate approvals are obtained and adequate operational procedures and risk
                         control systems are in place,
                 (iv)    appropriate risk control systems address market, credit, legal, operational, and
                         liquidity risks,
                 (v)     derivatives activities are undertaken by a sufficient number of professionals with
                         appropriate experience, skill levels, and certification,
                 (vi)    risk management procedures are regularly evaluated for appropriateness and soundness,
                 (vii) it approves all standard and non-standard derivative product programs,
                 (viii) there is an accurate, complete, informative, and timely management information system,
                        and
                 (ix)    the risk management function monitors and reports risk metrics to the Dealer Member’s
                         appropriate Executives and to the Dealer Member’s board of directors or equivalent.
4915. Pricing
         (1)     In addition to the requirements in Part C of Rule 4200, a Dealer Member must comply with the
                 requirements in subsections 4915(2) through 4915(4) in pricing derivatives.
         (2)     Derivative positions must be marked to market at least daily.
         (3)     A Dealer Member’s independent risk management function must:
                 (i)     validate all pricing models, including computing market data or model inputs,
                 (ii)    review and approve pricing models and valuation systems used by front and back-office
                         employees, and
                 (iii)   review and approve reconciliation procedures if different systems are used.
         (4)     Valuations derived from models must be independently reviewed at least monthly.
4916. – 4999. Reserved.




Series 4000 | Dealer Member Financial and Operational Rules                                                   Rule 4900
                                                           Investment Dealer and Partially Consolidated Rules


SERIES 5000 | DEALER MEMBER MARGIN RULES

RULE 5100 | MARGIN REQUIREMENTS - APPLICATION AND DEFINITIONS

5101. Introduction
         (1)    Rule 5100:
                (i)     describes the purposes and general application of Dealer Member inventory margin and
                        client account margin (as defined in section 5130) requirements [sections 5110 through
                        5117],
                (ii)    sets out the process for determining the appropriate margin rate to use when a rate is not
                        specified within the rules [section 5120], and
                (iii)   sets out the definitions used within Rules 5200 through 5900 [section 5130].
5102. - 5109. Reserved.
5110. Margin requirements - purposes
         (1)    The purposes of margin requirements are to:
                (i)     ensure that the maximum leverage levels extended to clients through the execution of a
                        transaction or a trading strategy are appropriate,
                and
                (ii)    set base line market and credit risk requirements that a Dealer Member must adhere to
                        when engaging in proprietary trading or client account margin lending.
         (2)    Sections 5111 through 5117 describe how the margin requirements apply, generally, as well as
                specifically to both Dealer Member inventory and client account positions.
5111. Margin requirements - general application
         (1)    A Dealer Member must:
                (i)     obtain from and maintain for each of its clients, and
                (ii)    maintain for its own inventory accounts,
                minimum margin in the amount and manner prescribed by the Corporation.
         (2)    A Dealer Member must calculate client account margin, and if such margin is not provided by the
                client, the Dealer Member must provide margin against the shortfall, and include the amount as
                client account margin when calculating its risk adjusted capital.
         (3)    A Dealer Member must calculate and provide Dealer Member inventory margin for its own
                positions and indicate the amount as margin on securities owned and sold short when calculating
                its risk adjusted capital.
         (4)    In Rules 5200 through 5900, unless stated otherwise, margin rates are expressed as a percentage
                of the market value of the security or derivative position for which margin is being calculated.
5112. Application of margin requirements - Dealer Member inventory positions
         (1)    Section 5112 describes the calculations for determining margin requirements for long and short
                positions in Dealer Member inventory. It applies to Rules 5200 through 5900.


Series 5000 | Dealer Member Margin Rules                                                                    Rule 5100
                                                            Investment Dealer and Partially Consolidated Rules

         (2)    Dealer Member long inventory margin
                A Dealer Member must provide margin for its long inventory positions in the amount calculated
                according to the formula:
                (i)     applicable margin rate x market value of security, or
                (ii)    by any alternative method specified in the Corporation requirements.
         (3)    Dealer Member short inventory margin
                A Dealer Member must provide margin for its short inventory positions in the amount calculated
                according to the formula:
                (i)     applicable margin rate x market value of security (expressed as absolute value), or
                (ii)    by any alternative method specified in the Corporation requirements.
5113. Application of margin requirements - client account positions
         (1)    Section 5113 describes the calculations for determining margin requirements for long and short
                positions in client accounts. It applies to Rules 5200 through 5900.
         (2)    Client accounts - loan value of long positions
                The loan value of a long position is generally calculated according to the formula:
                (i)     [100% - applicable margin rate %] x positive market value of the security, or
                (ii)    by any alternative method specified in the Corporation requirements.
         (3)    Client accounts - loan value of short positions
                The loan value of a short client position is generally calculated according to the formula:
                (i)     [100% + applicable margin rate %] x negative market value of security, or
                (ii)    by any alternative method specified in the Corporation requirements.
         (4)    Net loan value and status of a client account
                (i)     The positive and negative loan values in a client margin account must be totalled.
                (ii)    If the total loan value in a client account results in a net positive loan value, the client may
                        have a debit cash balance no larger than the positive loan value amount for the account to
                        be in good standing.
                (iii)   If the total loan value in a client account results in a net negative loan value, the cash
                        balance in the margin account must be a credit equal to or larger than the net negative loan
                        value for the account to be in good standing.
                (iv)    If a client does not bring its account into good standing by depositing the required amount
                        of margin into its account, subsection 5111(2) applies.
5114. Client securities that are collateral for a margin debt
         (1)    If a client is in debt to a Dealer Member, all securities the Dealer Member holds for the client, up
                to an amount that reasonably covers the margin debt, are collateral for payment of the debt.
         (2)    The securities a Dealer Member holds under subsection 5114(1) are collateral security subject to
                Form 1, Schedule 4 and to any agreement between the Dealer Member and the client.
5115. Dealer Member’s rights in securities of indebted clients
         (1)    A Dealer Member has the right to:

Series 5000 | Dealer Member Margin Rules                                                                         Rule 5100
                                                               Investment Dealer and Partially Consolidated Rules

                (i)     raise money on,
                (ii)    carry in its general loans, and
                (iii)   pledge and repledge,
                the client securities it holds as collateral under section 5114.
5116. Dealer Member may buy or sell client securities
         (1)    If a Dealer Member considers it necessary for its credit risk protection, it may:
                (i)     buy securities held short for an indebted client, or
                (ii)    sell securities it holds for an indebted client.
5117. Dealer Member’s right to recover from indebted client
         (1)    A Dealer Member may recover the amount of the debt from an indebted client with or without
                realizing on any of the client’s securities.
5118. - 5119. Reserved.
5120. Margin requirements - when a rate is not specified
         (1)    Where a security position is held in either the Dealer Member’s inventory or in a client account
                for which a margin rate or requirement is not specified within the Corporation requirements, the
                Dealer Member must obtain a margin rule interpretation from Corporation staff specifying the
                margin rate or requirement to be used.
5121. - 5229. Reserved.
5130. Definitions
         (1)    In Rules 5100 through 5900, unless stated otherwise, any term used that is not defined here or in
                the Rule where it is used, but is defined or used in Form 1, has the meaning defined or used in
                Form 1.
         (2)     For all positions subject to margin, the term:
                  “client account margin” (i)      A minimum percentage of a security’s or derivative contract’s market
                                                   value, or
                                            (ii)   a calculated dollar amount
                                            that a client must deposit with a Dealer Member when borrowing from the
                                            Dealer Member to buy securities or to sell securities short or to enter into the
                                            derivative contract.
                  “Dealer Member            (i)    A minimum percentage of a security’s or derivative instrument’s market
                  inventory margin”                value, or
                                            (ii)   a calculated dollar amount
                                            that a Dealer Member must provide when calculating its risk adjusted capital.
                  “equivalent number”       (i)    A position with the same underlying number of shares, units of the same
                  or “equivalent                   issuer,
                  quantity” or              (ii)   futures contracts based on the same underlying number of shares, units of
                  “equivalent quantities”          the same issuer, or


Series 5000 | Dealer Member Margin Rules                                                                               Rule 5100
                                                              Investment Dealer and Partially Consolidated Rules

                                           (iii) a position with the same currency denomination and market value,
                                           as the offset or combination position with which it is paired.
                  “loan value”             The complement of the client account margin and is the maximum a Dealer
                                           Member may loan to a client for a particular security or derivative position.
                  “normal margin” or       Margin otherwise required in Rules 5200 through 5900.
                  “normal margin
                  required”
                  “underlying interest” or In the case of:
                  “underlying security”    (i) a convertible security, the security to be received upon invoking the
                  or “underlying basket          conversion or exchange feature,
                  of securities”           (ii) an exercisable security, the security to be received upon invoking the
                                                 exercise feature,
                                           (iii) an index participation unit, the basket of securities to be received upon
                                                 invoking the conversion or exchange feature,
                                           (iv) an installment receipt, the security that has been purchased on an
                                                installment basis by the holder of the installment receipt,
                                           (v)   residual debt securities and strip debt securities, the debt security used to
                                                 create the residual debt securities and strip debt securities,
                                           (vi) currency options, the currency referenced by the option,
                                           (vii) equity, index participation unit and debt options, the security referenced
                                                 by the option,
                                           (viii) index options, the index referenced by the option,
                                           (ix) a total performance swap, the security or basket of securities on which the
                                                swap is based, and
                                           (x)   a structured product, the security or basket of securities on which the
                                                 performance of the structured product is based.

         (3)    For positions in and offsets involving debt securities and related instruments, the term:
                  “acceptable              Notes issued by a company that meet the requirements in subsection 5220(2).
                  commercial, corporate
                  and finance company
                  notes”
                  “call protection period” The period of time during which the issuer cannot redeem a callable debt
                                           security.
                  “callable debt security” A debt security which can be redeemed by the issuer at a fixed price at any time
                                           other than during the call protection period.
                  “Canada debt             Bonds, debentures, treasury bills, notes and certain other non-commercial debt
                  securities”              securities not in default that are issued or guaranteed by the government of
                                           Canada.




Series 5000 | Dealer Member Margin Rules                                                                               Rule 5100
                                                              Investment Dealer and Partially Consolidated Rules

                  “Canada Municipal        Bonds, debentures, treasury bills, notes and certain other non-commercial debt
                  debt securities”         securities not in default that are issued or guaranteed by a Canadian municipal
                                           government.
                  “Canada Provincial       Bonds, debentures, treasury bills, notes and certain other non-commercial debt
                  debt securities”         securities not in default that are issued or guaranteed by a Canadian provincial
                                           government.
                  “Canada Provincial       A residual portion from a debt security issued or guaranteed by a Canadian
                  residuals”               province.
                  “Canada Provincial       A strip coupon from a debt security issued or guaranteed by a Canadian
                  strips”                  province.
                  “Canada residuals”       A residual portion from a debt security issued or guaranteed by the Government
                                           of Canada.
                  “Canada strips”          A strip coupon from a debt security issued or guaranteed by the Government of
                                           Canada.
                  “Canadian banker         A three month Canadian bankers acceptance futures contract that trades on the
                  acceptance futures       Bourse de Montreal under the “BAX” trading symbol.
                  contract”
                  “extendible debt         A debt security which allows a Dealer Member holder, during a fixed time period,
                  security”                to:
                                           (i)    extend the security’s maturity date to the extension maturity date, and
                                           (ii)   in change the principal amount of the security by a fixed percentage (the
                                                  extension factor) of the original principal amount.
                  “extension election      The period of time during which a Dealer Member holder may elect to:
                  period”                  (i)    extend the maturity date, and
                                           (ii)   in change the principal amount,
                                           of an extendible debt security.
                  “extension factor”       The fixed percentage used to change the original principal amount of an
                                           extendible debt security, if any.
                  “floating rate debt      A debt security of either a government issuer that otherwise meets the
                  obligation”              requirements under subsection 5210(1) or a corporate issuer that otherwise
                                           meets the requirements under subsection 5220(1), with terms that provide for
                                           interest rate adjustments at least quarterly with reference to an interest rate set
                                           for a term of 90 days or less.
                  “low current credit      A current credit rating of “B” or lower by a designated rating organization.
                  rating”
                  “maturity band”          The range of years within which the debt security subject to margin matures.
                  “retractable debt        A debt security which allows the Dealer Member holder, during a fixed time
                  security”                period, to:
                                           (i)    retract the security’s maturity date to the retraction maturity date, and

Series 5000 | Dealer Member Margin Rules                                                                               Rule 5100
                                                               Investment Dealer and Partially Consolidated Rules

                                            (ii)   change the principal amount of the security by a fixed percentage (the
                                                   retraction factor) of the original principal amount.
                  “retraction election      The period of time during which a holder may elect to:
                  period”                   (i)    retract the maturity date, and
                                            (ii)   change the principal amount
                                            of a retractable debt security.
                  “retraction factor”       The fixed percentage used to change the original principal amount of a
                                            retractable debt security, if any.
                  “United States debt       Bonds, debentures, treasury bills, notes and certain other non-commercial debt
                  securities”               securities not in default that are issued or guaranteed by the government of the
                                            United States.

         (4)    For positions in and offsets involving equity and equity index securities and rights and warrants,
                the term:
                  “basic margin             A customized security specific margin rate for a security that is based on the
                  requirement”              security’s traded price per share.
                  “Canada and United        Securities (other than bonds, debentures, rights and warrants) listed on any
                  States listed equity      acceptable exchange or market tier in Canada or the United States with
                  securities eligible for   adequate minimum pre-tax profit, net tangible asset and working capital
                  margin”                   requirements, as determined by the Corporation.
                  “Canada and United        Unlisted:
                  States unlisted equity    (i)    equity securities of insurance companies licensed to do business in Canada,
                  securities eligible for   (ii) equity securities of Canadian banks,
                  margin”
                                            (iii) equity securities of Canadian trust companies,
                                            (iv) senior equity securities of other Canadian and United States listed
                                                 companies,
                                            (v) equity securities which qualify as legal for investment by Canadian life
                                                insurance companies, without recourse to the basket clause, and
                                            (vi) equity securities which have received conditional approval to list on an
                                                 acceptable exchange in Canada within the last 90 days.
                  “control block”           A person’s or combination of persons’ holdings of an issuer’s securities in
                                            sufficient number to materially affect control of that issuer. If a person or
                                            combination of persons holds over 20% of the outstanding voting securities of an
                                            issuer that person or combination of persons must, absent evidence to the
                                            contrary, be considered to materially affect control of that issuer.
                  “floating rate preferred A special or preferred share with terms that provide for dividend rates that
                  share”                   fluctuate at least quarterly in tandem with a prescribed short term interest rate.




Series 5000 | Dealer Member Margin Rules                                                                               Rule 5100
                                                                Investment Dealer and Partially Consolidated Rules

                  “foreign listed equity    Securities (other than bonds, debentures, rights and warrants) listed on an
                  securities eligible for   acceptable exchange outside of Canada and the United States that are
                  margin”                   constituent securities for the exchange’s major widely quoted market index, and
                                            the index is on the Corporation’s list of foreign market indices whose constituent
                                            securities are eligible for margin.
                  “future payments”         The unpaid payments of the purchase price for an underlying security of an
                                            installment receipt.
                  “government               Equity securities where the payment of all dividends, redemption amounts, or
                  guaranteed equity         other return of capital to holder is unconditionally guaranteed by Government
                  securities”               of Canada or by a provincial government.
                  “installment receipt”     A security issued by or for an issuer or selling security holder that:
                                            (i)    evidences partial payment for an underlying security of an installment
                                                   receipt, and
                                            (ii) requires one or more subsequent payments by installment,
                                            to entitle the holder of the installment receipt to delivery of the underlying
                                            security of an installment receipt.

         (5)    For positions in underwriting commitments and positions traded on a when issued basis, the
                term:
                  “appropriate              With respect to the portion of the commitment where expressions of interest
                  documentation”            have been received from exempt purchasers means, at a minimum:
                                            (i)    that the lead underwriter has a record of the final affirmed exempt
                                                   purchaser allocation indicating for each expression of interest:
                                                   (a) the name of the exempt purchaser,
                                                   (b) the name of the employee of the exempt purchaser accepting the
                                                       amount allocated, and
                                                   (c) the name of the representative of the lead underwriter responsible for
                                                       affirming the amount allocated to the exempt purchaser, time
                                                       stamped to indicate date and time of affirmation
                                                      and,
                                            (ii)   that the lead underwriter has notified in writing all the banking group
                                                   participants when the entire allotment to exempt purchasers has been
                                                   affirmed pursuant to clause (i) above so that all banking group participants
                                                   may take advantage of the reduction in the margin requirement.
                                            Under no circumstances may the lead underwriter reduce its own margin
                                            requirement on a commitment due to such expressions of interest from exempt
                                            purchasers without providing notification to the rest of the banking group.
                  "commitment"              Pursuant to an underwriting agreement or banking group agreement to
                                            purchase a new issue of securities or a secondary issue of securities means,
                                            where all other non-pricing agreement terms have been agreed to, where two of
                                            the following three pricing terms have been agreed to:


Series 5000 | Dealer Member Margin Rules                                                                                 Rule 5100
                                                                 Investment Dealer and Partially Consolidated Rules

                                           (i)    issue price,
                                           (ii)   number of shares, or
                                           (iii) commitment amount (issue price x number of shares).


                  “disaster out clause”    A provision in an underwriting agreement substantially in the following form:
                                                  “The obligations of the Underwriter (or any of them) to purchase (the
                                                  Securities) under this agreement may be terminated by the Underwriter
                                                  (or any of them) at its option by written notice to that effect to the
                                                  Company at any time prior to the Closing if there should develop, occur or
                                                  come into effect or existence any event, action, state, condition or major
                                                  financial occurrence of national or international consequence or any law
                                                  or regulation which in the opinion of the Underwriter seriously adversely
                                                  affects, or involves, or will seriously adversely affect, or involve, the
                                                  financial markets or the business, operations or affairs of the Company
                                                  and its subsidiaries taken as a whole.”
                  “exempt purchaser”       An accredited investor that qualifies as an institutional client.
                  “market out clause”      A provision in an underwriting agreement which permits an underwriter to
                                           terminate its obligation to purchase in the event of unsalability due to market
                                           conditions, substantially in the following form:
                                                   “If, after the date hereof and prior to the Time of Closing, the state of
                                                   financial markets in Canada or elsewhere where it is planned to market
                                                   the Securities is such that, in the reasonable opinion of the Underwriters
                                                   (or any of them), the Securities cannot be marketed profitably, any
                                                   Underwriter shall be entitled, at its option, to terminate its obligations
                                                   under this agreement by notice to that effect given to the Company at or
                                                   prior to the Time of Closing.”
                  “new issue letter”       An underwriting loan facility in a form satisfactory to the Corporation.
                  “normal new issue        (i)    Where, in the case of an equity security, the market value is $2.00 per
                  margin”                         share or more and the equity security qualifies for inclusion on the List of
                                                  Securities Eligible for Reduced Margin, 60% of normal margin for the
                                                  period from the date of commitment to the business day prior to
                                                  settlement date and 100% of normal margin from settlement date on,
                                           (ii)   where, in the case of an equity security, the market value of the security is
                                                  $2.00 per share or more and the security does not qualify for inclusion on
                                                  the List of Securities Eligible for Reduced Margin, 80% of normal margin for
                                                  the period from the date of commitment to the business day prior to
                                                  settlement date and 100% of normal margin from settlement date on, or
                                           (iii) in all other instances, 100% of normal margin.




Series 5000 | Dealer Member Margin Rules                                                                                Rule 5100
                                                                  Investment Dealer and Partially Consolidated Rules

                  “trading on a when        Purchases or sales of a security to be issued under:
                  issued basis”             (i)    a prospectus offering if a receipt for a (final) prospectus for the security has
                                                   been issued but the offering has not closed and settled,
                                            (ii)   a proposed plan of arrangement, an amalgamation, or a take-over bid,
                                                   prior to the date the security is issued under the amalgamation,
                                                   arrangement or take-over bid, or
                                            (iii) any other transaction that is subject to the satisfaction of certain
                                                  conditions, provided that the trading of the security on a when issued basis
                                                  would not contravene securities laws.

         (6)    For positions in and offsets involving capital shares, convertible securities and exercisable
                securities, the term:
                  “capital share”           A share issued by a split share company that represents all or most of the capital
                                            appreciation part of an underlying common share.
                  “capital share            Any excess of the market value of a capital share position over its retraction
                  conversion loss”          value.
                  “combined conversion      Any excess of the combined market value of positions in capital shares and split
                  loss”                     share preferred shares over their combined retraction value.
                  “conversion loss”         Any excess market value of a convertible security position over the market value
                                            of the equivalent number of underlying securities.
                  “convertible security”    A convertible security, exchangeable security or any other security that entitles
                                            the holder to acquire another security, the underlying security, upon exercising a
                                            conversion or exchange feature.
                  “currently convertible”   A security that is:
                                            (i)    convertible within 20 business days into another security, the underlying
                                                   security, or
                                            (ii)   convertible after the expiry of a specific period into another security, the
                                                   underlying security, and the Dealer Member or client has entered into a
                                                   term securities borrowing agreement, which includes the minimum
                                                   agreement terms specified in subsection 5840(3), enabling a borrow of the
                                                   underlying security for the entire period from the current date until the
                                                   expiry of the specific period until conversion.
                  “currently exercisable”   A security that is exercisable into the underlying security:
                                            (i)    exercisable within 20 business days into another security, the underlying
                                                   security, or
                                            (ii)   exercisable after the expiry of a specific period into another security, the
                                                   underlying security, and the Dealer Member or client has entered into a
                                                   term securities borrowing agreement, which includes the minimum
                                                   agreement terms specified in subsection 5840(3), enabling a borrow of the
                                                   underlying security for the entire period from the current date until the
                                                   expiry of the specific period until exercise.


Series 5000 | Dealer Member Margin Rules                                                                                  Rule 5100
                                                                Investment Dealer and Partially Consolidated Rules

                  “exercisable security”   A warrant, right, installment receipt, or any other security entitling the holder to
                                           acquire the underlying security after making an exercise or subscription
                                           payment.
                  “exercise loss”          Any excess of the sum of the market value of an exercisable security position and
                                           its exercise or subscription payment requirement over the market value of the
                                           equivalent number of underlying securities.
                  “Newco securities”       Securities of a successor issuer or issuers resulting from an amalgamation,
                                           acquisition, spin-off or any other securities related reorganization transaction.
                  “Oldco securities”       Securities of a predecessor issuer or issuers resulting from an amalgamation,
                                           acquisition, spin-off or any other securities related reorganization transaction.
                  “retraction value”       A value assigned to capital shares or a combination of capital shares and split
                                           share preferred shares, and is calculated as follows:
                                           (i)     for capital shares:
                                                  (a) where the capital shares can be tendered to the split share company
                                                      for retraction directly for the underlying common shares, at the option
                                                      of the holder, the excess of the market value of the underlying
                                                      common shares received over the retraction cash payment to be made
                                                      when retraction of the capital shares takes place,
                                                  (b) where the capital shares cannot be tendered to the split share
                                                      company for retraction directly for the underlying common shares at
                                                      the option of the holder, the retraction cash payment to be received
                                                      when retraction of the capital shares takes place,
                                           (ii)    for capital shares and split share preferred shares in combination:
                                                   (a) where the capital shares and split share preferred shares can be
                                                       tendered to the split share company for retraction directly for the
                                                       underlying common shares, at the option of the holder, the market
                                                       value of the underlying common shares received,
                                                   (b) where the capital shares and split share preferred shares cannot be
                                                       tendered to the split share company for retraction directly for the
                                                       underlying common shares at the option of the holder, the retraction
                                                       cash payment to be received when retraction of the capital and split
                                                       share preferred shares takes place.
                  “split share company”    A corporation formed for the sole purpose of acquiring underlying common
                                           shares and issuing its own:
                                           (i)    capital shares based on all or most of the capital appreciation portion, and
                                           (ii) split share preferred shares based on all or most of the dividend income
                                                portion,
                                           of those underlying common shares.




Series 5000 | Dealer Member Margin Rules                                                                                 Rule 5100
                                                                 Investment Dealer and Partially Consolidated Rules

                  “split share preferred     A share issued by a split share company that represents all or most of the
                  share”                     dividend part of the underlying common share, and includes equity dividend
                                             shares of split share companies.

         (7)    For positions in and offsets involving swaps, the term:
                  “fixed interest rate”      An interest rate that is not reset at least every 90 days.
                  “floating interest rate”   An interest rate that is not a fixed interest rate.

                  “interest rate swap”       An agreement under which a Dealer Member is required to pay a fixed (floating)
                                             rate and entitled to receive a floating (fixed) rate amount calculated with
                                             reference to a notional amount.
                  “realization clause”       An optional clause within a total performance swap agreement which allows the
                                             Dealer Member to close out the swap agreement at the realization price (either
                                             the buy-in or sell-out price) of the security position involved in the offset.



                  “total performance         An agreement under which a Dealer Member is required to pay and entitled to
                  swap”                      receive amounts calculated:
                                             (i)    based on the performance of a specified underlying security or underlying
                                                    basket of securities, and
                                             (ii) with reference to a notional amount.

         (8)    For structured product positions, the term:
                  “structured product”       A financial instrument where the return is linked to the performance of a
                                             specified underlying security or underlying basket of securities. Structured
                                             products include:
                                             (i)    principal at risk notes, and
                                             (ii)   principal protected notes.
                  “principal at risk note”   A financial instrument where the return is linked to the performance of a
                                             specified underlying security or underlying basket of securities and the investor
                                             carries a risk of losing part or all of the initial amount invested.
                  “principal protected       A financial instrument where the return is linked to the performance of a
                  note”                      specified underlying security or underlying basket of securities and at maturity
                                             the investor receives as a minimum, the initial amount invested.

         (9)    For positions in and offsets involving foreign exchange exposures, the term:
                  “foreign exchange          A monetary asset or liability including a:
                  position”                  (i)    currency spot position,
                                             (ii)   futures and forward contract,
                                             (iii) swap, and
                                             (iv) any other transaction resulting in exposure to foreign exchange rate risk,
                                             that is denominated in a foreign currency.



Series 5000 | Dealer Member Margin Rules                                                                                Rule 5100
                                                                   Investment Dealer and Partially Consolidated Rules

                  “monetary asset or       A Dealer Member’s asset or liability:
                  liability”, “monetary    (i)     in money and claims to money,
                  asset”, “monetary        (ii)    denominated in foreign or domestic currency, and
                  liability”
                                           (iii) that is fixed by contract or otherwise.
                  “net long (short)        The net of monetary assets and liabilities as calculated on Form 1, Schedule 11.
                  foreign exchange
                  position”
                  “spot exchange rate”     The rate quoted by a recognized quote vendor for contracts with a term to
                                           maturity of one day.
                  “term to maturity”       For a monetary asset or liability means the amount of time from the present to
                                           the time when the claim to the monetary asset or the obligation to satisfy the
                                           monetary liability expires.

         (10) For positions in and offsets involving derivative products, the term:
                  “aggregate current       For index options:
                  value”                          index        x     $1.00    x   unit of trading
                                                  level
                  “aggregate exercise      For options:
                  value”                          option exercise        x    unit of trading
                                                  price
                  “at-the-money”           (i)      For equity, index participation unit, debt and currency options, that the
                                                    market price, and
                                           (ii)     for index options, that the current value
                                           of the underlying interest is equal to the exercise price for a call option or a put
                                           option.
                  “broad based index”      An equity index in which:
                                           (i)      the basket of equity securities underlying the index consists of thirty or
                                                    more securities,
                                           (ii)     the single largest basket security position by weighting comprises not more
                                                    than 20% of the overall market value of the basket,
                                           (iii) the average market capitalization associated with each security in the
                                                 basket of equity securities underlying the index is at least $100 million,
                                           (iv) the basket securities shall be from a broad range of industries and market
                                                sectors as determined by the Corporation to represent index
                                                diversification, and
                                           (v)      the index constituent securities are listed and traded on an acceptable
                                                    exchange.




Series 5000 | Dealer Member Margin Rules                                                                                  Rule 5100
                                                              Investment Dealer and Partially Consolidated Rules

                  “call option”            (i)    An exchange-traded option that:
                                                  (a) for equity, index participation unit, debt and currency options, gives a
                                                      holder the right to buy and the writer the obligation to sell the
                                                      underlying interest at a stated exercise price on or before the option
                                                      expiration date, and
                                                  (b) for index options, gives the holder the right to receive and the writer
                                                      the obligation to pay, if the current value of the index rises above the
                                                      exercise price, the difference between the aggregate exercise price and
                                                      the aggregate current value of the underlying interest on or before the
                                                      option expiration date,
                                           (ii)   an over-the-counter option that either:
                                                  (a) gives a holder the right to buy and the writer the obligation to sell the
                                                      underlying interest at a stated exercise price on or before the option
                                                      expiration date, or
                                                  (b) gives the holder the right to receive and the writer the obligation to
                                                      pay, if the current value of the underlying interest rises above the
                                                      exercise price, the difference between the aggregate exercise price and
                                                      the current value of the underlying interest on or before the option
                                                      expiration date.
                  “cumulative relative     An overall relative weight percentage determined by calculating, in accordance
                  weight percentage”       with subsection 5360(7), the actual basket weighting for each security in a
                                           qualifying basket of index securities in relation to its latest published relative
                                           weighting in the index.
                  “escrow receipt”         A document issued by a financial institution approved by a recognized option
                                           clearing corporation certifying that a security is held and will be delivered by
                                           that financial institution when a specified option is exercised.
                  “exchange-traded         A call option or put option issued by the Canadian Derivatives Clearing
                  option”                  Corporation, the Options Clearing Corporation or any other corporation or
                                           organization recognized by the Board.
                  “exercise price”         (i)    For equity, index participation unit, debt and currency options, the
                                                  specified price per unit at which the underlying interest may be bought
                                                  under a call option, or sold under a put option, and
                                           (ii)   for index options, the specified price per unit that may be received by the
                                                  holder and paid by the writer under a call option or a put option,
                                           on exercise of the option.
                  “floating margin rate”   The floating margin rate set by the Corporation in accordance with subsection
                                           5360(5), subject to the minimum floor margin rate in subsection 5360(2).
                  “incremental basket      The incremental basket rate for a qualifying basket of index securities calculated
                  margin rate”             in accordance with subsection 5360(8).
                  “index”                  Either a broad based index or a sector index.


Series 5000 | Dealer Member Margin Rules                                                                               Rule 5100
                                                               Investment Dealer and Partially Consolidated Rules

                  “index futures           An exchange-traded futures contract with an underlying interest that is an index.
                  contract”
                  “index option”           An exchange-traded option with an underlying interest that is an index.
                  “index participation     An interest in a trust or other entity that has assets consisting of equities or
                  unit”                    other securities underlying an index.
                  “index participation     An option with an underlying interest that is an index participation unit.
                  unit option”
                  “in-the-money”           (i)    For equity, index participation unit, debt and currency options, that the
                                                  market price, and
                                           (ii)   for index options, that the current value,
                                           of the underlying interest is above the exercise price for a call option, and below
                                           the exercise price for a put option.
                  “out-of-the-money”       (i)    For equity, index participation unit, debt and currency options, that the
                                                  market price, and
                                           (ii)   for index options, that the current value
                                           of the underlying interest is below the exercise price of a call option, and above
                                           the exercise price of a put option.
                  “over-the-counter        A call option or a put option other than an exchange-traded option.
                  option”
                  “premium”                The aggregate price, excluding commissions and other fees, that the option
                                           buyer pays and the option writer receives for the rights under the option
                                           contract.
                  “put option”             (i)    An exchange-traded option that:
                                                  (a) for equity, index participation unit, debt and currency options, gives
                                                      the holder the right to sell and the writer the obligation to buy the
                                                      underlying interest at a stated exercise price on or before the option
                                                      expiration date, and
                                                  (b) for index options, gives the holder the right to receive and the writer
                                                      the obligation to pay, if the current value of the index falls below the
                                                      exercise price, the difference between the aggregate exercise price and
                                                      the aggregate current value of the underlying interest on or before the
                                                      option expiration date,
                                           (ii)   an over-the-counter option that either:
                                                  (a) gives the holder the right to sell and the writer the obligation to buy
                                                      the underlying interest at a stated exercise price on or before the
                                                      option expiration date, or
                                                  (b) gives the holder the right to receive and the writer the obligation to
                                                      pay, if the current value of the index falls below the exercise price, the
                                                      difference between the aggregate exercise price and the aggregate



Series 5000 | Dealer Member Margin Rules                                                                                Rule 5100
                                                              Investment Dealer and Partially Consolidated Rules

                                                     current value of the underlying interest on or before the option
                                                     expiration date.
                  “qualifying basket of    A basket of equity securities with the characteristics in subsection 5360(6).
                  index securities”
                  “recognized option       The Canadian Derivatives Clearing Corporation, the Options Clearing
                  clearing corporation”    Corporation or any other corporation or organization recognized by the Board.
                  “regular reset date”     The date after the last reset date if the maximum number of trading days in the
                                           regular reset period has passed.
                  “regular reset period”   The normal period between margin rate resets. This period is determined by the
                                           Corporation and is not longer than 60 trading days.
                  “regulatory margin       The Corporation’s regulatory margin calculation determined in accordance with
                  interval”                subsection 5360(4).
                  “sector index”           An equity index in which:
                                           (i) the basket of equity securities underlying the index consists of eight or
                                                 more securities,
                                           (ii) the single largest basket security position by weighting comprises not more
                                                 than 35% of the overall market value of the basket,
                                           (iii) the average market capitalization associated with each security in the
                                                 basket of equity securities underlying the index is at least $100 million, and
                                           (iv) the index constituent securities are listed and traded on an acceptable
                                                 exchange.
                  “time value”             An excess of the market value of an option over the in-the-money value of the
                                           option.
                  “tracking error margin   The last calculated regulatory margin interval for the tracking error resulting
                  rate”                    from a particular offset strategy, subject to the minimum floor margin rate in
                                           subsection 5360(2).
                  “unit of trading”        The number of units of the underlying interest that have been designated by an
                                           exchange as the minimum number or value to be the subject for a single option
                                           in a series of options. If there is no such designation, for a series of options the
                                           following rules apply:
                                           Underlying interest                      Unit of trading
                                           (i)     equity                           100 shares
                                           (ii)    index participation unit         100 units
                                           (iii)   debt                             250 units
                                           (iv)    index                            100 units
                  “violation”              Occurs if the maximum one or two day percentage change in the daily closing
                                           prices is greater than the margin rate.

5131. - 5199. Reserved.




Series 5000 | Dealer Member Margin Rules                                                                                Rule 5100
                                                             Investment Dealer and Partially Consolidated Rules

RULE 5200 | MARGIN REQUIREMENTS FOR DEBT SECURITIES AND MORTGAGES

5201. Introduction
         (1)    Rule 5200 sets out specific Dealer Member inventory margin and client account margin
                requirements for:
                (i)      government debt securities not in default [sections 5210 through 5214],
                (ii)     commercial and corporate debt securities not in default [sections 5220 through 5226], and
                 (iii)   debt securities in default [section 5230].
         (2)    Rule 5200 also describes the circumstances under which the debt margin surcharge applies, and
                details the calculation thereof [sections 5240 and 5241].
         (3)    Rule 5200 also sets out specific Dealer Member inventory margin and client account margin
                requirements for mortgages [section 5250].
         (4)    The margin requirements for debt securities subject to redemption call or offer are set out in Rule
                5400.
         (5)    The Dealer Member inventory margin requirements for debt security underwriting commitments
                are set out in Rule 5500.
5202. - 5209. Reserved.

GOVERNMENT DEBT SECURITIES
5210. Government issued or guaranteed bonds, debentures, treasury bills, notes and certain other non-
      commercial securities not in default
         (1)    The minimum Dealer Member inventory margin and client account margin requirements for
                Government issued or guaranteed bonds, debentures, treasury bills, notes and certain other non-
                commercial securities not in default are as follows:
                                                    Minimum margin required as a percentage of market value
                                                  Category (i)
                                           Governments of Canada,             Category (ii)
                                            United Kingdom, United         Canadian provincial        Category (iii)
                                              States and national     government, and obligations    Canadian and
                                           governments of countries     of the International Bank   United Kingdom
                 Term to maturity             with a high current           for Reconstruction         municipal
                 or redemption                   credit rating               and Development         corporations
                 Less than 1 year                    1.00%                       2.00%                   3.00%
                                                       x                           x                          x
                                                   number of                   number of               number of
                                                days to maturity            days to maturity        days to maturity
                                                      365                         365                      365




Series 5000 | Dealer Member Margin Rules                                                                          Rule 5200
                                                            Investment Dealer and Partially Consolidated Rules

                                                    Minimum margin required as a percentage of market value
                                                 Category (i)
                                           Governments of Canada,              Category (ii)
                                            United Kingdom, United           Canadian provincial       Category (iii)
                                              States and national       government, and obligations    Canadian and
                                           governments of countries       of the International Bank   United Kingdom
                 Term to maturity             with a high current             for Reconstruction         municipal
                 or redemption                   credit rating                 and Development         corporations
                 Greater than or equal
                 to 1 year and less                 1.00%                         3.00%
                 than 3 years
                 Greater than or equal
                 to 3 years and less                2.00%                         4.00%
                 than 7 years                                                                              5.00%
                 Greater than or equal
                 to 7 years and less
                 than 11 years                      4.00%                         5.00%
                 Greater than or equal
                 to 11 years

         (2)    In subsection 5210(1) category (i), a country with a “high current credit rating” is a country that is
                currently rated AAA by a designated rating organization.
         (3)    In subsection 5210(1) category (ii), British Columbia government guaranteed parity bonds, the
                margin requirement for a long position must be at least 0.25% of the par value of the bonds.
         (4)    If a security in subsection 5210(1) is redeemable and the security is called for redemption, the
                term to maturity is the term to the redemption date.
5211. Government residual debt and stripped coupons not in default
         (1)    The minimum Dealer Member inventory margin and client account margin requirements for the
                Government residual debt and stripped coupons not in default are as follows:
                                                    Minimum margin required as a percentage of market value
                                                  Category (i)               Category (ii)
                                           Governments of Canada,         Canadian provincial
                                            United Kingdom, United          government, and
                                              States and national           obligations of the        Category (iii)
                                           governments of countries      International Bank for   Canadian and United
                 Term to maturity or       with a high current credit      Reconstruction and      Kingdom municipal
                 redemption                          rating                   Development             corporations
                 Less than 1 year                   1.50%                        3.00%                   4.50%
                                                       x                           x                        x
                                                  number of                   number of                number of

Series 5000 | Dealer Member Margin Rules                                                                         Rule 5200
                                                             Investment Dealer and Partially Consolidated Rules

                                                    Minimum margin required as a percentage of market value
                                                  Category (i)              Category (ii)
                                           Governments of Canada,        Canadian provincial
                                            United Kingdom, United         government, and
                                              States and national          obligations of the        Category (iii)
                                           governments of countries     International Bank for   Canadian and United
                 Term to maturity or       with a high current credit     Reconstruction and      Kingdom municipal
                 redemption                          rating                  Development             corporations
                                               days to maturity            days to maturity        days to maturity
                                                      365                        365                      365
                 Greater than or equal
                 to 1 year and less than            1.50%                       4.50%
                 3 years
                 Greater than or equal
                 to 3 years and less                3.00%                       6.00%
                 than 7 years
                                                                                                        7.50%
                 Greater than or equal
                 to 7 years and less
                 than 11 years
                                                    6.00%                       7.50%
                 Greater than or equal
                 to 11 years and less
                 than 20 years
                 Greater than or equal
                                                    12.00%                     15.00%                   15.00%
                 to 20 years

         (2)    In subsection 5211(1) category (i), a country with a “high current credit rating” is a country that is
                currently rated AAA by a designated rating organization.
         (3)    In subsection 5211(1), the maturity date of a coupon or other evidence of interest is the interest
                payment date.
5212. Government floating rate debt obligations
         (1)    The minimum margin required for government floating rate debt obligations held in Dealer
                Member inventory and client accounts is the sum of:
                (i)     50% of the margin otherwise applicable to the par value of the debt security, and
                (ii)    100% of the margin otherwise applicable to any excess of the market value over the par
                        value of the debt security.
5213. Government mortgage-backed securities
         (1)    The minimum Dealer Member inventory margin and client account margin requirements for
                government mortgage-backed securities are as follows:




Series 5000 | Dealer Member Margin Rules                                                                        Rule 5200
                                                             Investment Dealer and Partially Consolidated Rules


                                                                           Minimum margin requirement expressed as a
                                           Security type                          percentage of market value
                 Security backed by mortgages and guaranteed as to Where the guarantor qualifies:
                 timely payment of principal and interest by an issuer (i) under subsection 5210(1) as a government debt
                 or its agent                                              issuer, 1.25 times the applicable rate set out in
                                                                               subsection 5210(1), or
                                                                       (ii) under subsection 5214(1) as another non-
                                                                            commercial debt issuer, 1.25 times the
                                                                            applicable rate set out in subsection 5214(1).

5214. Other non-commercial issuers not qualifying under sections 5210 through 5212
         (1)    The minimum Dealer Member inventory margin and client account margin requirements for
                securities of all other non-commercial issuers not qualifying under sections 5210 through 5212
                are as follows:
                                                           Minimum margin required as a percentage of market value
                                                                Category (i)                            Category (ii)
                                                All other non-commercial issuers’           All other non-commercial issuers’
                                                    bonds and debentures not                     residual debt and stripped
                                                 qualifying under sections 5210               coupons not qualifying under
                 Term to maturity or redemption            through 5212                         sections 5210 through 5212

                 Less than 1 year

                 Greater than or equal to 1 year
                 and less than 3 years

                 Greater than or equal to 3 years
                 and less than 7 years                                                                    15.00%
                                                                  10.00%
                 Greater than or equal to 7 years
                 and less than 11 years
                 Greater than or equal to 11 years
                 and less than 20 years

                 Greater than or equal to 20 years                                                        30.00%

         (2)    If a security in subsection 5214(1) is redeemable and the security is called for redemption, the
                term to maturity is the term to the redemption date.
         (3)    In subsection 5214(1), the maturity date of a coupon or other evidence of interest is the interest
                payment date.




Series 5000 | Dealer Member Margin Rules                                                                                Rule 5200
                                                              Investment Dealer and Partially Consolidated Rules

5215. - 5219. Reserved.

CORPORATE DEBT SECURITIES
5220. Commercial and corporate bonds, debentures, notes and other securities not in default
         (1)    The minimum Dealer Member inventory margin and client margin requirements for commercial
                and corporate bonds, debentures, notes and other securities not in default are as follows:
                                                     Minimum margin required as a percentage of market value
                                                         Category (i)
                                               Commercial and corporate bonds,
                                                debentures and notes and non-
                                             negotiable and non-transferable trust
                                            and mortgage loan company obligations
                                           registered in the Dealer Member’s name;
                                                              and                                Category (ii)
                                            acceptable commercial, corporate and       Canadian and foreign category (i)
                                              finance company notes and readily      issues and obligations with a market
                                            negotiable and transferable trust and    value of 50% or less of par value and
                 Term to maturity            mortgage loan company obligations.         with a low current credit rating
                 Within 1 year                             3.00%
                                                              x
                                                 number of days to maturity
                                                             365
                                                                                                   50.00%
                 Over 1 to 3 years                         6.00%
                 Over 3 to 7 years                         7.00%
                 Over 7 to 11 years
                                                           10.00%
                 Over 11 years

         (2)    In subsection 5220(1) category (i), acceptable commercial, corporate and finance company notes
                means notes issued by a company that comply with the following requirements:
                (i)     In the case of a note of a Canadian incorporated issuer:
                        (a)     the issuer must have a net worth of at least $10,000,000,
                        (b)     the note must be guaranteed by another company with a net worth of at least
                                $10,000,000, or
                        (c)     the issuer must have a binding agreement with another company with net worth of
                                at least $25,000,000 to pay the issuer or a noteholders’ trustee any note
                                indebtedness outstanding.
                (ii)    In the case of a note of a foreign incorporated issuer:
                        (a)     the issuer must have a net worth of at least $25,000,000, or
                        (b)     the note must be guaranteed by a foreign incorporated company with a net worth of
                                at least $25,000,000.

Series 5000 | Dealer Member Margin Rules                                                                          Rule 5200
                                                                 Investment Dealer and Partially Consolidated Rules

5221. Convertible commercial and corporate bonds, debentures, notes and other securities not in default
         (1)    The minimum Dealer Member inventory margin and client account margin requirements for
                convertible commercial and corporate bonds, debentures, and notes not in default, and non-
                negotiable and non-transferable trust company and mortgage loan company obligations
                registered in the Dealer Member’s name are as follows:
                                               Minimum margin required expressed as a percentage of market value or
                                                                       as a dollar amount
                                                                                                      Category (iii)
                                                                                                  Margin required when
                                                 Category (i)                Category (ii)        market value is 50% or
                                            Margin required when       Margin required when        less of par value and
                                            market value is above      market value is at or     issuer has a low current
                   Term to maturity               par value              below par value                credit rating
                  Basic margin requirement
                   Within 1 year                    3.00%                      3.00%
                                                      x                           x
                                               number of days              number of days
                                                 to maturity                 to maturity
                                                     365                         365
                                           multiplied by par value     multiplied by par value
                                           plus any excess of
                                           convertible debt market
                                           value over convertible
                                           debt par value.
                   Over 1 to 3 years       6.00% of par value          6.00% of market value
                                           plus any excess of
                                           convertible debt market                               50.00% of market value
                                           value over convertible
                                           debt par value.
                   Over 3 to 7 years       7.00% of par value          7.00% of market value
                                           plus any excess of
                                           convertible debt market
                                           value over convertible
                                           debt par value.
                   Over 7 to 11 years      10.00% of par value         10.00% of market value
                   Over 11 years           plus any excess of
                                           convertible debt market
                                           value over convertible
                                           debt par value.



Series 5000 | Dealer Member Margin Rules                                                                           Rule 5200
                                                                 Investment Dealer and Partially Consolidated Rules

                                                Minimum margin required expressed as a percentage of market value or
                                                                        as a dollar amount
                                                                                                              Category (iii)
                                                                                                         Margin required when
                                                  Category (i)                   Category (ii)           market value is 50% or
                                            Margin required when             Margin required when         less of par value and
                                            market value is above            market value is at or      issuer has a low current
                   Term to maturity               par value                    below par value                 credit rating
                   Alternative margin requirement
                   As an alternative to the margin requirements set out above, the margin requirement may be calculated
                   for categories (i) through (iii) as the sum of the margin required for the underlying security plus any
                   excess of the convertible debt market value over the underlying security market value.

5222. Bank paper not in default
         (1)    The minimum Dealer Member inventory margin and client margin requirements for bank paper
                not in default are as follows:
                                                       Minimum margin required as a percentage of market value
                                                                                  Category (ii)               Category (iii)
                                                  Category (i)       Bank acceptances, deposit      Canadian and foreign
                                           Bank acceptances, deposit certificates, promissory    category (i) and (ii) issues
                                            certificates, promissory  notes issued by a foreign    and obligations with a
                                             notes and debentures      bank with a net worth      market value of 50% or
                                             issued by a Canadian    (capital + reserves) of not less of par value and with
                  Term to maturity              chartered bank         less than $200 million    a low current credit rating
                  Within 1 year                                     2.00%
                                                                        x
                                                        number of days to maturity
                                                                       365
                                                                                                                 50.00%
                  Over 1 to 3 years                                 6.00%
                  Over 3 to 7 years                                 7.00%
                  Over 7 to 11 years
                                                                  10.00%
                  Over 11 years

5223. Commercial residual debt and stripped coupons not in default
         (1)    The minimum Dealer Member inventory margin and client account margin requirements for
                commercial residual debt and stripped coupons not in default are as follows:
                                                  Minimum margin required expressed as a percentage of market value
                                                        Category (i)                                 Category (ii)
                                                 Commercial residual debt             Commercial residual debt and stripped
                 Term to maturity                  and stripped coupons             coupons where the underlying security has a


Series 5000 | Dealer Member Margin Rules                                                                                   Rule 5200
                                                               Investment Dealer and Partially Consolidated Rules

                                                                               market value of 50% or less of par value and
                                                                                     has a low current credit rating
                 Within 1 year                          4.50%
                                                           x
                                             number of days to maturity
                                                         365

                 Over 1 to 3 years                      9.00%                                     50.00%
                 Over 3 to 7 years                     10.50%

                 Over 7 to 11 years
                                                       15.00%
                 Over 11 to 20 years
                 Over 20 years                         30.00%

         (2)    In subsection 5223(1), the maturity date of a coupon or other evidence of interest is the interest
                payment date.
5224. Convertible commercial residual debt not in default
         (1)    The minimum Dealer Member inventory margin and client account margin requirements for
                convertible commercial residual debt not in default are as follows:
                                                 Minimum margin required expressed as a percentage of market value
                                                                      or as a dollar amount
                                                                                                   Category (ii)
                                                                                        Margin required for commercial
                                                                                      convertible residual debt where the
                                                          Category (i)                  underlying security has a market
                                                Margin required for commercial        value of 50% or less of par value and
                 Term to maturity                 convertible residual debt              has a low current credit rating
                 Basic margin requirement
                 Within 1 year               The greater of:
                 Over 1 to 3 years           (a) margin calculated for underlying
                                                 security under subsection
                 Over 3 to 7 years
                                                 5221(1), and                                          50.00%
                 Over 7 to 11 years
                                             (b) margin calculated for residual
                 Over 11 to 20 years             debt instrument under subsection
                                                 5223(1).
                 Over 20 years
                 Alternative margin requirement
                 As an alternative to the margin requirements set out above, the margin requirement may be calculated for
                 categories (i) and (ii) as the sum of the margin required for the underlying security plus any excess of the
                 convertible debt market value over the underlying security market value.




Series 5000 | Dealer Member Margin Rules                                                                            Rule 5200
                                                                Investment Dealer and Partially Consolidated Rules

5225. Commercial and corporate floating rate debt obligations not in default
         (1)    The minimum margin required for commercial and corporate floating rate debt obligations not in
                default held in Dealer Member inventory and client accounts is the sum of:
                (i)       50% of the margin otherwise applicable to the par value of the debt security, and
                (ii)      100% of the margin otherwise applicable to any excess of the market value over the par
                          value of the debt security.
5226. Commercial and corporate income bonds not in default
         (1)    The minimum Dealer Member inventory margin and client margin requirements for income
                bonds not in default are as follows:
                                      Minimum margin required expressed as a percentage of market value
                                           Category (i)
                       Income bonds currently and for the past two                           Category (ii)
                        years paying interest at the full stated rate                  All other income bonds
                                             10.00%                                            50.00%


         (2)    To qualify under subsection 5226(1), the trust indenture must specify:
                (i)       an interest rate, and
                (ii)     that interest must be paid if earned.
5227. Commercial and corporate mortgage-backed securities
         (1)    The minimum Dealer Member inventory margin and client account margin requirements for
                mortgage-backed securities are as follows:
                 Security type                                               Minimum margin required expressed as a
                                                                                  percentage of market value

                 Security backed by mortgages and guaranteed as         Where the guarantor qualifies:
                 to timely payment of principal and interest by an      (i) under subsection 5220(1) as commercial and
                 issuer or its agent                                        corporate debt issuer, 1.25 times the applicable
                                                                            rate set out in subsection 5220(1), or
                                                                        (ii) under subsection 5222(1) as a bank paper issuer,
                                                                             1.25 times the applicable rate set out in
                                                                             subsection 5222(1).

5228. - 5229. Reserved.

DEBT SECURITIES IN DEFAULT
5230. Debt securities in default
         (1)    The minimum margin required for debt in default is 50% of market value.




Series 5000 | Dealer Member Margin Rules                                                                              Rule 5200
                                                           Investment Dealer and Partially Consolidated Rules

5231. - 5239. Reserved.

DEBT MARGIN SURCHARGE
5240. Circumstances under which debt margin surcharge is imposed
         (1)    Higher margin requirements for debt securities, by way of a margin surcharge, may be established
                by the Corporation in response to market conditions.
         (2)    The Corporation monitors the price volatility of debt securities that Dealer Members trade,
                determines when a margin surcharge is required, and when it is no longer required.
         (3)    The margin surcharge required under this section 5240 is:
                (i)     50% of the margin required in sections 5210 through 5226, and
                (ii)    required for at least 30 days.
         (4)    A Dealer Member will be notified by the Corporation of the imposition or revocation of a margin
                surcharge promptly following the Corporation determining that the margin surcharge is, or is no
                longer, required. The notice is effective, and a Dealer Member must be in compliance with it, not
                less than five days after it is given.
5241. Determining debt margin surcharge
         (1)    The Corporation determines the debt margin surcharge according to the calculations in section
                5241.
         (2)    The Corporation monitors government of Canada - issued debt securities maturing in each of the
                three periods:
                (i)     over 1 year to 3 years,
                (ii)    over 3 years to 7 years, and
                (iii)   over 7 years,
                for price volatility in the primary markets in which a Dealer Member trades them. Each maturity is
                considered a separate class of debt securities.
         (3)    The Corporation measures price volatility as follows:
                (i)     start with the closing price on a trading day for a security in monitored markets (the base
                        day),
                (ii)    compare the closing price of a security on each of the four trading days after the base day
                        to the closing price in clause 5241(3)(i),
                (iii)   the first day (if any) of the four days in clause 5241(3)(ii) on which the percentage change in
                        price (negative or positive) between the closing price on that day and the closing price in
                        clause (i) is greater than the margin rate required in Rule 5200, is an “offside base day”,
                (iv)    if an offside base day has occurred, it becomes the base day for making further
                        comparisons under clauses 5241(3)(i) and 5241(3)(ii),
                (v)     if an offside base day does not occur in the four trading days following the base day, then
                        the trading day after the base day becomes the new base day, and the calculations under
                        clauses 5241(3)(ii) through 5241(3)(iv) are made with reference to that new base day,
                (vi)    for any 90 day period, the Corporation must determine p% as follows:


Series 5000 | Dealer Member Margin Rules                                                                       Rule 5200
                                                               Investment Dealer and Partially Consolidated Rules

                                # of offside base days x 100             =     p%
                                total # trading days in the period
                (vii) If p% is greater than 5% for any two of the three classes of debt securities monitored, a
                      margin surcharge will be required.
         (4)    After a margin surcharge has been required for at least 30 days under subsection 5240(3), the
                Corporation will look at the number of offside base days. If the number of offside base days is not
                more than 5% of the total number of trading days in the immediately preceding 90 day period,
                the margin surcharge will no longer be required.
5242. - 5249. Reserved.

MORTGAGES
5250. Mortgages
         (1)    The minimum Dealer Member inventory margin requirements for mortgages are as follows:
                                                                             Minimum margin requirement expressed as
                 Mortgage type                                                     a percentage of market value
                 National Housing Act insured mortgage                                         6%
                 Conventional first mortgage                           12% or the rate set by the chartered banks,
                                                                       whichever is greater

         (2)    Client account positions in mortgages may not be carried on margin.
5251. - 5299. Reserved.




Series 5000 | Dealer Member Margin Rules                                                                             Rule 5200
                                                                Investment Dealer and Partially Consolidated Rules

RULE 5300 | MARGIN REQUIREMENTS FOR EQUITY SECURITIES AND INDEX PRODUCTS

5301. Introduction
         (1)    Rule 5300 sets out specific Dealer Member inventory margin and client account margin
                requirements for:
                (i)     equity securities [sections 5310 through 5315],
                (ii)    installment receipts [section 5320],
                (iii)   convertible and exchangeable equities [section 5330],
                (iv)    control blocks [sections 5340],
                (v)     rights and warrants [section 5350],
                (vi)    index products [section 5360], and
                (vii) securities held in a Trader’s account [section 5370].
         (2)    The margin requirements for equity securities subject to redemption call or offer are set out in
                Rule 5400.
         (3)    The Dealer Member inventory margin requirements for equity security underwriting
                commitments are set out in Rule 5500.
         (4)    The margin requirements for when issued trading are set out in Rule 5500.
5302. - 5309. Reserved.

EQUITY SECURITIES
5310. Determining the basic margin requirement
         (1)    Where a security is eligible to be margined using the basic margin requirement approach, the
                minimum Dealer Member inventory margin and client account margin rates (or dollar amounts
                per share) are as follows:
                                                                           Minimum margin required as a percentage of
                 Market value per share                                    market value or as a dollar amount per share

                 Long positions:
                 Market value of $2.00 or more per share and            25% for Dealer Member positions;
                 qualifying for inclusion on the List of Securities     30% for client account positions
                 Eligible for Reduced Margin published by the
                 Corporation

                 All other positions with a market value of $2.00 or    50%
                 more per share

                 Market value of $1.75 per share to $1.99 per share     60%
                 Market value of $1.50 per share to $1.74 per share     80%
                 Market value of below $1.50 per share                  100%




Series 5000 | Dealer Member Margin Rules                                                                          Rule 5300
                                                                Investment Dealer and Partially Consolidated Rules


                                                                               Minimum margin required as a percentage of
                 Market value per share                                        market value or as a dollar amount per share
                 Short positions:

                 Market value of $2.00 or more per share and                25% for Dealer Member positions;
                 qualifying for inclusion on the List of Securities         30% for client account positions
                 Eligible for Reduced Margin published by the
                 Corporation

                 All other positions with a market value of $2.00 or        50%
                 more per share

                 Market value of $1.75 per share to $1.99 per share         60%
                 Market value of $1.50 per share to $1.74 per share         80%
                 Market value of $0.25 per share to $1.49 per share         100%
                 Market value of below $0.25 per share                      $0.25 per share

5311. Canada and United States equity securities eligible for margin
         (1)    The minimum Dealer Member inventory margin and client account margin rates (or dollar
                amounts per share) for Canada and United States listed equity securities eligible for margin are
                the basic margin requirements in section 5310.
         (2)    The minimum Dealer Member inventory margin and client account margin rates (or dollar
                amounts per share) for Canada and United States unlisted equity securities eligible for margin are
                the basic margin requirements in section 5310.
5312. Foreign listed equity securities eligible for margin
         (1)    The minimum Dealer Member inventory margin and client account margin rate for foreign listed
                equity securities eligible for margin is 50%.
5313. Government guaranteed equity securities
         (1)    The minimum Dealer Member inventory margin and client account margin rate for government
                guaranteed equity securities is 25%.
5314. Floating rate preferred shares
         (1)    The minimum Dealer Member inventory margin and client account margin requirements for
                floating rate preferred shares are as follows:
                 Default status and conversion features                              Minimum margin required
                 Not in default of any dividend payment
                 Floating rate preferred shares of issuer             50% of margin rate for related           market value of
                                                                                                         x
                                                                      common share of issuer                   preferred shares
                 Floating rate preferred shares with a market
                                                                      50% of margin rate for related           market value of
                 value at or below par value and convertible                                         x
                                                                      common share of issuer                   preferred shares
                 into other securities of issuer


Series 5000 | Dealer Member Margin Rules                                                                                  Rule 5300
                                                                  Investment Dealer and Partially Consolidated Rules


                 Default status and conversion features                              Minimum margin required
                 Not in default of any dividend payment

                 Floating rate preferred shares with a market       The lesser of:
                 value above par value and convertible into         (i)   (a) 50% of margin rate for related common share of
                 other securities of issuer                                   issuer x preferred share par value,
                                                                          +
                                                                          (b) preferred share market value - preferred share
                                                                              par value,
                                                                    and
                                                                    (ii) (a) the margin required under Rule 5200, 5300 or
                                                                             5400 for the underlying security,
                                                                          +
                                                                          (b) the market value of the preferred shares - the
                                                                              market value of the underlying security

                  In default of one or more dividend payments

                  All floating rate preferred shares in default      50% of margin rate for related         market value of
                                                                                                    x
                  whether convertible or not                         common share of issuer                 preferred shares

5315. Other equity securities
         (1)    The minimum Dealer Member inventory margin and client account margin rates (or dollar
                amounts per share) for equity securities not eligible for margin under subsections 5311(1),
                5312(1), 5313(1) or 5314(1) are as follows:
                                                        Minimum margin required as a percentage of market value or as a
                                                                          dollar amount per share

                                                                                      Category (i)
                                                        Equity securities not eligible for margin under subsections 5311(1),
                 Market value per share                                     5312(1), 5313(1) or 5314(1)
                 Long positions:
                 All market value per share levels                                       100%

                 Short positions:
                 Market value of $0.50 per share
                                                                                         100%
                 and above
                 Market value of below $0.50 per
                                                                                     $0.50 per share
                 share

5316. - 5319. Reserved.




Series 5000 | Dealer Member Margin Rules                                                                                Rule 5300
                                                             Investment Dealer and Partially Consolidated Rules

INSTALLMENT RECEIPTS
5320. Installment receipts
         (1)    A Dealer Member must calculate Dealer Member inventory margin and client account margin for
                installment receipt long positions according to the following:
                 Account where position is held                                    Minimum margin required
                 Held in Dealer Member inventory account               100% of margin required for underlying security plus
                                                                       any excess of the future installment payments over
                                                                       the market value of the underlying security
                 Held in client account                                The lesser of 100% of margin required for underlying
                                                                       security and the market value of the installment
                                                                       receipt

         (2)    A Dealer Member may purchase and hold an installment receipt for its own account as
                beneficial owner.
         (3)    A Dealer Member may hold an installment receipt for a client registered in the Dealer Member’s
                or its nominee name.
         (4)    A Dealer Member must not purchase or hold an installment receipt that requires it or its nominee
                to make payment under the installment receipt.
         (5)    Subsection 5320(4) does not apply:
                (i)     to a Dealer Member’s payments for its own account as beneficial owner of the installment
                        receipt, or
                (ii)    if the agreement creating and issuing the installment receipts releases the Dealer Member
                        or its nominee from the requirement to make the payments in subsection 5320(4) either
                        by:
                        (a)     transferring the installment receipt to another person if an installment is not paid in
                                full when due, or
                        (b)     another mechanism approved by the Corporation.
                (iii)   The transfer in sub-clause 5320(5)(ii)(a) must be able to occur at any time before:
                        (a)     the close of business (Toronto time) on the second business day after default in
                                payment of an installment, and
                        (b)     the issuer’s or selling security holder’s rights arising from non-payment of the
                                installment can be enforced.
         (6)    If an installment on an installment receipt held for a client in subsection 5320(4) has not been
                paid in full when due, the Dealer Member must promptly take steps necessary to be released
                from any requirements to pay the installment or any future payments. The Dealer Member must
                take steps within the time permitted by the agreement creating and issuing the installment
                receipts. If appropriate or necessary, the Dealer Member must transfer the installment receipt to
                another person.




Series 5000 | Dealer Member Margin Rules                                                                           Rule 5300
                                                                Investment Dealer and Partially Consolidated Rules

5321. - 5329. Reserved.

CONVERTIBLE AND EXCHANGEABLE EQUITIES
5330. Convertible and exchangeable equities
         (1)    The minimum Dealer Member inventory margin and client account margin requirements
                calculated for convertible and exchangeable equity securities may be limited to an overall
                maximum margin requirement calculated as follows:
                                                            Minimum margin required
                                                                   Category (i)
                                  Equity security currently convertible into or exchangeable for another security

                 The sum of :
                 (a) the margin required under Rule 5300 for the underlying security,
                 plus
                 (b) any excess of the market value of the convertible or exchangeable equity security over the market
                     value of the underlying security.

5331. - 5339. Reserved.

CONTROL BLOCKS
5340. Control blocks
         (1)    The minimum Dealer Member inventory margin and client account margin rates for control blocks
                are 100% unless the position is part of an underwriting commitment that is subject to the
                requirements of Rule 5500.
5341. - 5349. Reserved.

RIGHTS AND WARRANTS
5350. Canada and United States rights and warrants eligible for margin
         (1)    The minimum Dealer Member inventory margin and client account margin rates (or dollar
                amounts per share) for unlisted warrants issued by a chartered bank and Canada and United
                States listed rights and warrants are as follows:
                                                            Minimum margin required

                                           Category (i)
                  Unlisted warrants issued by a Canadian chartered
                  bank entitling the holder to buy securities issued                          Category (ii)
                    by the Government of Canada or a Canadian                     Canada and United States listed rights
                                       province                                              and warrants
                 The lesser of:
                 (a) 100% of the market value of the warrant, and
                 (b) the margin required for warrant’s underlying security.


Series 5000 | Dealer Member Margin Rules                                                                              Rule 5300
                                                                   Investment Dealer and Partially Consolidated Rules

5351. - 5359. Reserved.

INDEX PRODUCTS
5360. Index participation units and qualifying baskets of index securities
         (1)    The minimum Dealer Member inventory margin and client account margin requirements for index
                participation units and qualifying baskets of index securities are as follows:
                                                              Minimum margin required
                                           Category (i)                                         Category (ii)
                                  Index participation units                         Qualifying basket of index securities

                  (a) The greater of:                                         (a) The sum of:
                       (I) the floating margin rate percentage                    (I) the greater of:
                           (calculated for index participation unit                  (A) the floating margin rate percentage
                           based on its regulatory margin interval),                     (calculated for a perfect basket of
                           and                                                           index securities based on its
                       (II) the minimum floor margin rate required                       regulatory margin interval), and
                            under subsection 5360(2),                                (B) the minimum floor margin rate
                  multiplied by                                                          required under subsection 5360(2),
                  (b) The market value of index participation units.              and
                                                                                  (II) The calculated incremental basket
                                                                                       margin rate for the qualifying basket of
                                                                                       index securities,
                                                                              multiplied by
                                                                              (b) The market value of qualifying basket of
                                                                                  index securities.

         (2)    The minimum floor Dealer Member inventory margin and client account margin rates for the
                purposes of subsection 5360(1) and offset strategies recognized in Rule 5700 are as follows:
                   Qualifying index, individual                    Category (i)                         Category (ii)
                   and offset strategies                  Broad based index as defined in        Sector index as defined in
                                                               subsection 5130(10)                 subsection 5130(10)
                   Floor rate percentage to be                       10.00%                                15.00%
                   used in determining margin
                   rate for unhedged positions
                   in index participation units
                   and qualifying basket of
                   index securities

                   Floor rate percentage to be                        2.00%                                3.00%
                   used in determining tracking
                   error margin rate for
                   qualifying offset strategies
                   involving index products


Series 5000 | Dealer Member Margin Rules                                                                                    Rule 5300
                                                            Investment Dealer and Partially Consolidated Rules

         (3)    The Corporation calculates a regulatory margin interval for index products on qualifying indices. A
                qualifying index for the purposes of subsections 5360(1) and 5360(2) must be a widely quoted
                market index, as determined by the Corporation, that:
                (i)     meets the minimum requirements for an index in subsection 5130(10), and
                (ii)    is included on the list of floating and tracking error margin rates for qualifying Canadian and
                        U.S. index products.
         (4)    The Corporation calculates a regulatory margin interval according to the following formula:
                 (i)     Maximum standard deviation of                       3 (for a 99%          Square root of 2
                         percentage changes in daily closing                 confidence            (for 2 days price
                                                                       x                       x
                         prices over the most recent 20, 90,                 interval)             risk coverage)
                         260 trading days
                         rounded up to the next ¼%.
                (ii)    In limited circumstances, to ensure appropriate margin requirements, the Corporation may
                        use discretion in calculating a regulatory margin interval. Dealer Members will be notified
                        by the Corporation if any adjustments to the regulatory margin interval calculation are
                        made.
         (5)    To calculate the floating margin rate for an index participation unit or a perfect basket of index
                securities:
                (i)     the Corporation uses the last calculated regulatory margin interval, which is effective for
                        the regular reset period unless a violation occurs,
                (ii)    in normal circumstances, the floating margin rate is reset on the regular reset date to the
                        regulatory margin interval calculated as at the regular reset date,
                (iii)   if a violation occurs, the Corporation may reset the floating margin rate on the date the
                        violation occurs to the regulatory margin interval determined as at the date of the
                        violation, and
                (iv)    the regulatory margin interval determined in clause 5360(5)(iii) will be effective for a
                        minimum of 20 trading days and reset at the close of the 20th trading day to the regulatory
                        margin interval determined as at that date if a reset results in a lower margin rate.
         (6)    A basket of equity securities is a qualifying basket of index securities if:
                (i)     all of the securities in the basket are included in the composition of the same index,
                (ii)    the basket comprises a portfolio with a market value equal to the market value of the
                        underlying securities in the index,
                (iii)   the market value of each equity security comprising the portfolio proportionally equals or
                        exceeds the market value of its relative weight in the index, based on the latest published
                        relative weights of securities comprising the index, and
                (iv)    the required cumulative relative weight percentage of all equity securities comprising the
                        portfolio:
                        (a)     equals 100% of the cumulative weighting of the corresponding index, if the basket of
                                equity securities underlying the index is comprised of less than 20 securities,



Series 5000 | Dealer Member Margin Rules                                                                         Rule 5300
                                                               Investment Dealer and Partially Consolidated Rules

                        (b)     equals or exceeds 90% of the cumulative weighting of the corresponding index, if the
                                basket of equity securities underlying the index is comprised of 20 or more securities
                                but less than 100 securities, and
                        (c)     equals or exceeds 80% of the cumulative weighting of the corresponding index, if the
                                basket of equity securities underlying the index is comprised of 100 or more
                                securities,
                        based on the latest published relative weightings of the equity securities comprising the
                             index.
                (v)     If the cumulative relative weighting of all equity securities in the basket equals or exceeds
                        the required cumulative relative weight percentage and is less than 100% of the cumulative
                        weighting of the corresponding index, the deficiency in the basket must be filled by other
                        equity securities included in the composition of the index.
         (7)    The cumulative relative weight percentage is determined:
                (i)     by calculating for each security in a qualifying basket of index securities:
                        (a)     its actual basket weighting, and
                        (b)     its latest published relative weighting in the index,
                 and then,
                (ii)    by summing the lesser of the two weighting percentages calculated for each security in sub-
                        clauses 5360(7)(i)(a) and 5360(7)(i)(b) for all of the securities in the qualifying basket of
                        index securities.
         (8)    The incremental basket margin rate for a qualifying basket of index securities is calculated as the
                sum:
                   Market value of             Margin rate for that            The % by which the security is
                   each                        security                        underweighted (calculated according to the
                   underweighted           x                              x    formula: published relative weighting of the
                   security in                                                 security - actual basket weighting of the
                   basket                                                      security)

                 for each underweighted security in the basket.
5361. - 5369. Reserved.
5370. Securities held in a Trader’s account
         (1)    The minimum Dealer Member inventory margin for a security position held in a Trader’s account
                is 25% of the market value of such security provided:
                (i)     the Trader has responsibility or has “on post” trading privileges for the security,
                (ii)    the security is eligible for margin pursuant to section 5311,
                (iii)   the security does not qualify for a 25% margin rate pursuant to section 5311, and
                (iv)    the security has traded at a value of at or above $2.00 per share for the previous calendar
                        quarter.
         (2)    The reduced margin available under subsection 5370(1) may be applied to a maximum total
                security market value in all Trader’s accounts of:


Series 5000 | Dealer Member Margin Rules                                                                            Rule 5300
                                                           Investment Dealer and Partially Consolidated Rules

                (i)     $100,000, if 90,000 shares of more of the security were traded in the previous calendar
                        quarter, and
                (ii)    $50,000, if less than 90,000 shares of the security were traded in the previous calendar
                        quarter.
                The minimum Dealer Member inventory margin on security position amounts over $100,000 and
                $50,000, respectively, shall be the minimum margin otherwise required pursuant to section 5311.
         (3)    The reduced margin available for all security positions under subsection 5370(1) shall not exceed
                50% of the Dealer Member’s net allowable assets.
5371. - 5399. Reserved.




Series 5000 | Dealer Member Margin Rules                                                                     Rule 5300
                                                           Investment Dealer and Partially Consolidated Rules

RULE 5400 | MARGIN REQUIREMENTS FOR OTHER INVESTMENT PRODUCTS

5401. Introduction
         (1)    Rule 5400 sets out specific Dealer Member inventory margin and client account margin
                requirements for investment products not covered in Rules 5200 or 5300. The order of subjects in
                Rule 5400 is:
                (i)     securities subject to redemption call or offer [section 5410],
                (ii)    units [section 5420],
                (iii)   precious metal certificates and bullion [section 5430],
                (iv)    swap contracts [sections 5440 through 5442],
                 (v)     mutual fund positions [section 5450],
                (vi)    structured products [section 5455 through 5456], and
                (vii) foreign exchange positions [sections 5460 through 5469].
5402. - 5409. Reserved.

SECURITIES SUBJECT TO REDEMPTION CALL OR OFFER
5410. Securities subject to redemption call or offer
         (1)    The minimum Dealer Member inventory margin and client account margin requirements for
                securities subject to redemption call or offer are as follows:
                                                                          Minimum margin required
                                                                 Category (i)                      Category (ii)
                                                          Securities called for cash      Securities subject to a binding
                                                       redemption according to their         cash offer, for which all
                 Conditions                                terms and conditions             conditions have been met
                 Cash offer for all the issued and   No margin required provided the market value of the position is no
                 outstanding class of securities     greater than the amount of the cash offer
                 Cash offer for a fraction of the    For fraction subject to cash offer, no margin required provided the
                 issued and outstanding class of     market value of the fractional position is no greater than the amount
                 securities                          of the cash offer.
                                                     For remainder of the position, normal margin (as determined
                                                     elsewhere in Rules 5200 through 5900) would apply.

5411. - 5419. Reserved.

UNITS
5420. Units
         (1)    The minimum Dealer Member inventory margin and client account margin requirement for units
                is the sum of the margin required for each of the unit components.
5421. - 5429. Reserved.


Series 5000 | Dealer Member Margin Rules                                                                           Rule 5400
                                                             Investment Dealer and Partially Consolidated Rules

PRECIOUS METAL CERTIFICATES AND BULLION
5430. Precious metal certificates and bullion
         (1)    The minimum Dealer Member inventory margin and client account margin requirements for
                precious metal certificates and bullion are as follows:
                                                                               Minimum margin required expressed as a
                 Precious metal investment type                                     percentage of market value
                 Negotiable certificates issued by chartered banks and trust
                 companies authorized to do business in Canada,                                 20%
                 evidencing an interest in one of gold, platinum or silver
                 Gold or silver bullion purchased by a Dealer Member for
                 inventory or on behalf of a client, from the Royal Canadian
                                                                                                20%
                 Mint or a chartered bank that is a market making member
                 or a full member of the London Bullion Market Association

         (2)    The Dealer Member must have a written representation from bullion vendor stating that the
                bullion are London Bullion Market Association good delivery bars for the bullion to be margin
                eligible under subsection 5430(1).
5431. - 5439. Reserved.

INTEREST RATE AND TOTAL PERFORMANCE SWAPS
5440. Interest rate swaps
         (1)    For interest rate swaps where payments are calculated with reference to a notional amount, the
                Dealer Member obligation to pay and entitlement to receive shall each be margined as separate
                components as follows:
                (i)     where a component is a payment calculated according to a fixed interest rate, the margin
                        required is the margin rate percentage specified in subsection 5210(1) category (i) for a
                        security with the same term to maturity as the outstanding term of the swap, multiplied by
                        125% and in turn multiplied by the notional amount of the swap, and
                (ii)    where a component is a payment calculated according to a floating interest rate, the
                        margin required is the margin rate percentage specified in subsection 5210(1) category (i)
                        for a security with the same term to maturity as the remaining term to the swap reset date,
                        multiplied by the notional amount of the swap.
5441. Total performance swaps
         (1)    For total performance swaps, where payments are calculated with reference to a notional
                amount, the Dealer Member obligation to pay and entitlement to receive shall each be margined
                as separate components as follows:
                (i)     where a component is a payment calculated based on the performance of a stipulated
                        underlying security or underlying basket of securities, with reference to a notional amount,
                        the margin requirement is the normal margin required for the underlying security or
                        underlying basket of securities relating to this component, based on the market value of
                        the underlying security or underlying basket of securities, and

Series 5000 | Dealer Member Margin Rules                                                                       Rule 5400
                                                            Investment Dealer and Partially Consolidated Rules

                (ii)    where a component is a payment calculated according to a floating interest rate, the
                        margin required is the margin rate percentage specified in subsection 5210(1) category (i)
                        for a security with the same term to maturity as the remaining term to the swap reset date,
                        multiplied by the notional amount of the swap.
5442. Swap counterparty margin requirements
         (1)    The counterparty to the swap agreement is considered the Dealer Member’s client and the
                minimum margin the Dealer Member shall obtain from the swap client is as follows:
                (i)     where the swap client is an acceptable institution, no margin, or
                (ii)    where the swap client is an acceptable counterparty or regulated entity, any market value
                        deficiency calculated relating to the swap agreement, or
                (iii)   where the counterparty is an other counterparty, any loan value deficiency calculated
                        relating to the swap agreement determined by using the same approach as set out in
                        sections 5440 and 5441 for Dealer Member swap positions.
         (2)    No margin is required in sub-clause 5442(1)(ii) provided:
                (i)     the Dealer Member takes action to correct the market value deficiency, and
                (ii)    the market value deficiency exists for less than one business day.
5443. - 5449. Reserved.

MUTUAL FUNDS
5450. Margin requirements for mutual fund positions
         (1)    The minimum Dealer Member inventory margin and client account margin rates (or dollar
                amounts per share) for securities of mutual funds qualified by prospectus for sale in any province
                of Canada are:
                (i)     for money market mutual funds (as defined in National Instrument 81-102), 5% of the
                        market value of the fund, and
                (ii)    for all other mutual funds, the margin rate determined in subsection 5310(1) (using the per
                        unit market value of the mutual fund) multiplied by the market value of the fund.
5451. - 5454. Reserved.

STRUCTURED PRODUCTS
5455. Margin requirements for structured products
         (1)    A structured product is eligible to be margined provided:
                (i)     the issuer of the structured product is a Canadian financial institution as defined in securities
                        laws, which qualifies as an acceptable institution,
                (ii)    at the time of issuance, the structured product’s underlying security or underlying basket of
                        securities are eligible for a margin rate of 50% or less under Rule 5200, 5300 or 5400, and
                (iii)   the issuer of the structured product or its affiliate is actively providing a secondary market.
         (2)    Where a structured product is eligible to be margined pursuant to 5455(1), the minimum Dealer
                Member inventory margin and client account margin requirements are as follows:

Series 5000 | Dealer Member Margin Rules                                                                         Rule 5400
                                                                 Investment Dealer and Partially Consolidated Rules


                 Type of structured product                                          Minimum margin required
                 principal protected note                                   30% of the market value of the principal
                                                                            protected note position
                 principal at risk note                                     50% of the market value of the principal at
                                                                            risk note position

5456. Alternative calculation approach for structured products
         (1)    For structured products with protection of all or a portion of the investment principal, where the
                performance component can be separated from the debt instrument component, the minimum
                Dealer Member inventory margin and client account margin requirements may be calculated as
                the sum of the separate components as follows:
                (i)     for the performance component linked to an underlying interest, 100% of the market value
                        of the performance component; and
                (ii)    for the debt instrument component, the margin rate percentage specified in subsection
                        5223(1), multiplied by the market value of the debt instrument component,
                provided the conditions in section 5455(1) are met.
5457. - 5459. Reserved.

FOREIGN EXCHANGE POSITIONS
5460. General margin requirements for foreign exchange positions
         (1)    The minimum Dealer Member inventory margin and client account margin requirements for a
                particular foreign exchange position are the aggregate of the spot risk margin requirement and
                term risk margin requirement, calculated using one of the following groups of spot risk margin
                rates and term risk margin rates for the relevant foreign currency:
                                      Spot risk and term risk margin required as a percentage of market value of the foreign
                                                                        exchange position

                                                                            Currency Group

                                                 1                      2                       3                      4
                 Spot risk          greater of:            greater of:             greater of:
                 margin rate        (i) 1.00%              (i) 3.00%               (i) 10.00%
                                    and                    and                     and                           25.00%
                                    (ii) spot risk         (ii) spot risk          (ii) spot risk
                                         surcharge rate         surcharge rate          surcharge rate
                 Term risk          lesser of:             lesser of:              lesser of:            lesser of:
                 margin rate        (i) 1.00% x foreign (i) 3.00% x foreign (i) 5.00% x foreign (i) 12.50% x foreign
                                        exchange             exchange             exchange           exchange position
                                        position term to     position term to     position term      term to maturity,
                                        maturity,            maturity,            to maturity,  and
                                    and                  and                  and               (ii) 25.00%
                                    (ii) 4.00%             (ii) 7.00%              (ii) 10.00%

Series 5000 | Dealer Member Margin Rules                                                                                   Rule 5400
                                                                  Investment Dealer and Partially Consolidated Rules

         (2)    The foreign exchange currency group that a particular country currency qualifies for is
                determined based on the currency group criteria set out in subsection 5461(1).
         (3)    The spot risk margin surcharge rate that may be in effect from time to time for a particular
                country currency is determined using the approach set out in subsection 5462(2).
         (4)    Dealer Members are permitted at their option to margin certain inventory positions in
                accordance with section 5467 instead of the other applicable provisions within sections 5461
                through 5466.
         (5)    References to conversion to Canadian dollars at the spot exchange rate are to the rate quoted by
                a recognized quote vendor for contracts with a term to maturity of one day.
         (6)    Monetary assets and liabilities are assets and liabilities, respectively, of a Dealer Member in
                respect of money and claims to money whether denominated in foreign or domestic currency,
                which are fixed by contract or otherwise.
         (7)    Inventory long or short currency futures contracts listed on a futures exchange which are
                included in the unhedged foreign exchange calculations hereunder are not required to be
                margined pursuant to section 5790.
         (8)    Dealer Members are permitted at their option to exclude non-allowable monetary assets
                from monetary assets for the purpose of calculating the margin requirement within sections 5461
                through 5467.
         (9)    The foreign exchange position term to maturity is the term to maturity of a particular foreign
                exchange position expressed in years.
5461. Foreign exchange currency group criteria and monitoring
         (1)    Criteria - The qualitative and quantitative criteria for initial qualification within each currency
                group are as follows:
                (i)     A Group 1 currency must:
                        (a)     have a spot price volatility level of less than or equal to 1.00%, and
                        (b)     be a primary intervention currency of the Canadian dollar.
                (ii)    A Group 2 currency must:
                        (a)     have a spot price volatility level of less than or equal to 3.00%,
                        (b)     have a daily quoted spot rate by a Schedule 1 chartered bank, and
                        (c)     have either:
                                (I)        a daily quoted spot rate by either:
                                       (A)       a member of the Economic and Monetary Union, or
                                       (B)       a participant in the Exchange Rate Mechanism II,
                                or
                                (II)       a listed currency futures contract on a futures exchange.
                (iii)   A Group 3 currency must:
                        (a)     have a spot price volatility level of less than or equal to 10.00%,
                        (b)     have a daily quoted spot rate by a Schedule 1 chartered bank, and


Series 5000 | Dealer Member Margin Rules                                                                        Rule 5400
                                                            Investment Dealer and Partially Consolidated Rules

                        (c)     be of a member country of the International Monetary Fund with Article VIII status,
                                and no capital payment restrictions as they relate to security transactions.
                (iv)    A Group 4 currency has no initial or ongoing qualification criteria.
         (2)    Monitoring currency adherence to group qualitative criteria -
                On at least an annual basis, the Corporation shall assess the adherence of each currency in a
                group to the qualitative criteria of the particular currency group to determine whether the
                currency continues to satisfy the qualitative criteria of the currency group.
         (3)    Currency group upgrades and downgrades – Where the Corporation determines that a particular
                currency:
                (i)     should be upgraded, because it now satisfies the criteria set out in subsection 5461(1) for a
                        currency group other than its current currency group, or
                (ii)    should be downgraded, because it no longer satisfies its current currency group criteria as
                        set out in subsection 5461(1),
                The Corporation shall recommend for approval its proposed upgrade or downgrade to the
                Corporation’s Financial and Operations Advisory Section. Upon the Corporation’s Financial and
                Operations Advisory Section approval, the Corporation shall notify Dealer Members of the
                upgrade or downgrade.
5462. Spot risk margin rate
         (1)    Minimum rates - The minimum spot risk margin rates for each Currency Group are as follows:
                                             Minimum spot risk margin required as a percentage of market value of the
                                                                   foreign exchange position

                                                                           Currency Group

                                                   1                   2                      3                4

                 Minimum spot risk
                                                1.00%               3.00%                   10.00%          25.00%
                 margin rate

         (2)    Spot price volatility levels - To monitor the volatility of each Group 1, 2 or 3 currency, the
                Canadian dollar equivalent closing price on each of the four trading days succeeding the "base
                day" is compared to the base day closing price. The first of four succeeding trading days on which
                the percentage change in price (negative or positive) between the closing price on the succeeding
                day and the closing price on the base day is greater than the spot risk margin rate prescribed for
                the particular currency in subsection 5460(1) is designated an "offside base day". If an offside
                base day has been designated, the offside base day is designated the base day for the purpose of
                making further base day closing price comparisons.
                If the number of offside base days during any 60 trading day period is greater than three, the
                currency is deemed to have exceeded the volatility threshold of the currency group.
                If the volatility of a Group 1, 2 or 3 currency exceeds the volatility threshold, the individual
                currency spot risk margin rate is increased by increments of 10% until the application of the
                increased margin rate would result in no more than two offside days during the preceding 60
                trading days. The increased margin rate shall apply for a minimum of 30 trading days and is


Series 5000 | Dealer Member Margin Rules                                                                           Rule 5400
                                                            Investment Dealer and Partially Consolidated Rules

                automatically decreased to the margin rate otherwise applicable when after such 30 trading day
                period the volatility of the currency is less than the volatility threshold.
                The Corporation is responsible for determining the required increase or decrease in foreign
                exchange spot risk margin rates under this subsection 5462(2).
5463. Spot risk margin requirement
         (1)    The spot risk margin requirement applies to all monetary assets and liabilities, regardless of term
                to maturity, and must be calculated as:
                 net long (short) foreign exchange position         x      spot risk margin rate
         (2)    The spot risk margin requirement must be converted to Canadian dollars at the current spot
                exchange rate.
5464. Term risk margin requirement
         (1)    The term risk margin requirement applies to all monetary assets or liabilities with a term to
                maturity of over two business days and must be calculated for each individual asset and liability
                as:
                 foreign exchange position                          x      term risk margin rate for the position
         (2)    The term risk margin requirement must be converted to Canadian dollars at the current spot
                exchange rate.
5465. Maximum security margin requirement
         (1)    The sum of:
                (i)     the spot risk margin requirement,
                (ii)    the term risk margin requirement, and
                (iii)   the security margin requirement as determined elsewhere in these Rules,
                must not exceed 100% of the market value of the security.
5466. Foreign exchange position offsets for Dealer Members
         (1)    A Dealer Member must calculate Dealer Member inventory margin and client margin for foreign
                exchange positions according to the currency groups and rates in subsection 5460(1).
         (2)    If a Dealer Member has a monetary asset and monetary liability in the same currency, the term
                risk margin requirement may be netted according to the following table:

                  Dealer Member position                                Term risk margin requirement
                  (i) Monetary asset and monetary liability,     Term risk margin requirement for both
                      both with a term to maturity of 2 years or positions may be netted
                      less
                  (ii) Monetary asset and monetary liability,           Term risk margin requirement for both
                       both with a term to maturity of over 2           positions is the greater of term risk
                       years                                            margin requirement for the monetary
                                                                        asset and the monetary liability.

Series 5000 | Dealer Member Margin Rules                                                                     Rule 5400
                                                             Investment Dealer and Partially Consolidated Rules


                  Dealer Member position                                 Term risk margin requirement
                  (iii)       Monetary asset (monetary liability)    Term risk margin requirement for both
                          with a term to maturity of 2 years or less positions may be netted
                          and monetary liability (monetary asset)
                          with a term to maturity of over 2 years
                          where difference in the terms to maturity
                          is 180 days or less.
         (3)    If a Dealer Member has a monetary asset and a monetary liability in the same currency group and
                one of the positions has a term to maturity of 2 years or less and the other has a term to maturity
                of more than 2 years, the term risk margin requirement for the two positions need not be greater
                than the following:

                                                             Currency Group
                                 1                       2                       3                       4
                        Market value of          Market value of         Market value of         Market value of
                        positions offset         positions offset        positions offset        positions offset
                                  x                      x                       x                       x
                                5.00%                 10.00%                 20.00%                   50.00%
5467. Alternative calculation approach for Dealer Member foreign exchange positions
         (1)    As an alternative to the foreign exchange margin requirement determined under sections 5463
                through 5466 for futures and forward contract inventory positions denominated in a currency
                which has a currency futures contract which trades on a futures exchange, the foreign exchange
                margin requirement may be calculated as follows.
                (i)        Futures contracts - Foreign exchange positions consisting of futures contracts may be
                           margined at the margin rates prescribed by the futures exchange on which the futures
                           contracts are listed.
                (ii)       Forward contracts offsets - Forward contract positions which are not denominated in
                           Canadian dollars may be margined as follows:
                          (a)     the margin requirement is the greater of the requirement determined under sections
                                  5463 through 5466 on each of the two positions,
                          (b)     two forward contracts held by a Dealer Member which have one currency common to
                                  both contracts, are for the same value date, and the amount of the common currency
                                  positions are equal and offsetting, may be treated as a single contract for the
                                  purposes of sub-clause 5467(1)(ii)(b).
                (iii)      Futures and forward contract offsets - Futures and forward contract positions which are
                           not denominated in Canadian dollars may be margined as follows:
                          (a)     (I)   the margin requirement is the greater of the requirement determined under
                                        sections 5463 through 5466 on each of the two positions,


Series 5000 | Dealer Member Margin Rules                                                                       Rule 5400
                                                              Investment Dealer and Partially Consolidated Rules

                                (II)   margin rates applicable to unhedged positions under paragraph
                                       5467(1)(iii)(a)(l) are the rates established by sections 5461 through 5466 and
                                       not the rates prescribed by the futures exchange on which the futures
                                       contracts are listed,
                        (b)     two forward contracts held by a Dealer Member which have one currency common to
                                both contracts, are for the same value date, and the amount of the common currency
                                positions are equal and offsetting, may be treated as a single contract for the
                                purposes of sub-clause 5467(1)(iii)(b).
5468. Client account margin requirements
         (1)    The minimum client account margin requirements for foreign exchange positions are the
                aggregate of the spot risk margin requirement and term risk margin requirement calculated for
                each position provided that:
                (i)     Where the positions are held in an account of:
                        (a)     an acceptable institution, no margin is required, or
                        (b)     an acceptable counterparty or a regulated entity, margin is calculated on a
                                mark-to-market basis.
                (ii)    The margin required in respect of foreign exchange positions (excluding cash balances) held
                        in the accounts of clients who are classified as other counterparties, as defined in Form 1,
                        which are denominated in a currency other than the currency of the account, is the
                        aggregate of the security margin requirement and the foreign exchange margin
                        requirement, provided that where the margin rate applicable to the security is greater than
                        the spot risk margin rate, the foreign exchange margin requirement is nil. The sum of the
                        security margin requirement and the foreign exchange margin requirement shall not
                        exceed 100%.
                (iii)   Listed futures contracts are margined in the same manner as prescribed in section 5790.
5469. Foreign exchange concentration charge
         (1)    In respect of any Group 2, Group 3 or Group 4 currency, a concentration charge as calculated in
                subsection 5469(2) may apply.
         (2)    The concentration charge that applies for any Group 2, Group 3 or Group 4 currency, is any
                excess of the aggregate of the foreign exchange margin provided under sections 5461 through
                5468 on a Dealer Member’s monetary assets and monetary liabilities and the foreign exchange
                margin on client accounts over 25% of the firm's net allowable assets net of minimum capital (as
                determined for the purposes of Form 1) as determined on a currency by currency basis.
5470. – 5499. Reserved.




Series 5000 | Dealer Member Margin Rules                                                                        Rule 5400
                                                            Investment Dealer and Partially Consolidated Rules

RULE 5500 | MARGIN REQUIREMENTS FOR UNDERWRITING COMMITMENTS AND WHEN ISSUED
            TRADING

5501. Introduction
         (1)    Rule 5500 covers Dealer Member inventory margin requirements for underwriting commitments
                and offsets involving underwriting commitments and Dealer Member inventory margin and client
                account margin requirements for when issued trading positions. The order of subjects in Rule
                5500 is:
                (i)     underwriting commitment amount [section 5510]
                (ii)    margin requirements for underwriting commitments:
                        (a)     where a new issue letter has not been obtained [section 5520],
                        (b)     where a new issue letter has been obtained [section 5521],
                        (c)     where expressions of interest from exempt purchasers have been received
                                [section 5522],
                        (d)     alternative approach to margining private placements of restricted equity securities
                                [section 5523],
                        (e)     standby commitment to purchase securities under a rights offering [section 5524],
                (iii)   underwriting related agreements [section 5530],
                (iv)    individual and overall underwriting concentration charges [sections 5540 and 5541],
                (v)     specific offset strategies involving commitments to purchase [sections 5550 through
                        5552],and
                (vi)    margin requirements for when issued trading positions [sections 5560 through 5562].
5502. - 5509. Reserved.

UNDERWRITING COMMITMENT AMOUNT
5510. Underwriting commitment amount
         (1)    In determining the amount of a Dealer Member's underwriting commitment for the purposes of
                sections 5520 through 5524, sections 5530 and 5531 and sections 5540 and 5541, receivables
                from Dealer Members of the banking or selling groups in respect of firm obligations to take down
                a portion of a new issue of securities (that is not after market trading) may be deducted from the
                liability of the Dealer Member to the issuer.
5511. - 5519. Reserved.

MARGIN REQUIREMENTS FOR UNDERWRITING COMMITMENTS
5520. Margin requirements for underwriting commitments where a new issue letter has not been obtained
         (1)    The minimum Dealer Member inventory margin requirement for a commitment in respect of a
                new issue of securities or a secondary issue of securities where a new issue letter has not been
                obtained is calculated in accordance with subsections 5520(2) through 5520(5).




Series 5000 | Dealer Member Margin Rules                                                                      Rule 5500
                                                              Investment Dealer and Partially Consolidated Rules

         (2)    No out clauses in effect - Where the commitment is not subject to a market out clause or a
                disaster out clause (by the exclusion of these clauses from the related underwriting agreement),
                the margin required is:
                (i)     from the commitment date to 20 business days after settlement date, normal new issue
                        margin,
                (ii)    thereafter, normal margin.
         (3)    Disaster out clause in effect - Where the commitment is subject to a disaster out clause (by the
                inclusion of this clause in the related underwriting agreement), the margin required is:
                (i)     from the commitment date to the settlement date of the offering or the expiry date of the
                        disaster out clause, whichever is earlier, 50% of normal new issue margin, and
                (ii)    thereafter, the same as in subsection 5520(2).
         (4)    Market out clause in effect - Where the commitment is subject to a market out clause (by the
                inclusion of this clause in the related underwriting agreement), the margin required is:
                (i)     from the commitment date to the settlement date of the offering or the expiry date of the
                        market out clause, whichever is earlier, 10% of normal new issue margin is required, and
                (ii)    thereafter, the same as in subsection 5520(2).
         (5)    Disaster out clause and market out clause in effect - Where the commitment is subject to a
                disaster out clause and a market out clause (by the inclusion of these clauses in the related
                underwriting agreement), the margin required is:
                (i)     from the commitment date to the settlement date of the offering or the expiry date of the
                        market out clause, whichever is earlier, 10% of normal new issue margin is required, and
                (ii)    thereafter:
                        (a)     where the disaster out clause is still in effect, the same as in subsection 5520(3), or
                        (b)     where the disaster out clause is also no longer effect, the same as in subsection
                                5520(2).
5521. Margin requirements for underwriting commitments where a new issue letter has been obtained
         (1)    The minimum Dealer Member inventory margin requirement for a commitment in respect of a
                new issue of securities or a secondary issue of securities where a new issue letter has been
                obtained is calculated in accordance with subsections 5521(2) through 5521(6).
         (2)    No out clauses in effect - Where the commitment is not subject to a market out clause or a
                disaster out clause (by the exclusion of these clauses from the related underwriting agreement),
                the margin required is:
                (i)     from the effective date of the new issue letter to the business day prior to the settlement
                        date of the offering:
                        (a)     where the new issue letter has not expired, 10% of normal new issue margin, and
                        (b)     where the new issue letter has expired, normal new issue margin,
                (ii)    from settlement date of the offering:
                        (a)     where the new issue letter has been drawn:
                                (I)    from settlement date to five business days after settlement date or when the
                                       new issue letter expires, whichever is earlier, 10% of normal new issue margin,

Series 5000 | Dealer Member Margin Rules                                                                          Rule 5500
                                                              Investment Dealer and Partially Consolidated Rules

                                (II)    for the next succeeding five business days or when the new issue letter expires,
                                        whichever is earlier, 25% of normal new issue margin,
                                (III)   for the next succeeding five business days or when the new issue letter expires,
                                        whichever is earlier, 50% of normal new issue margin,
                                (IV)    for the next succeeding five business days or when the new issue letter expires,
                                        whichever is earlier, 75% of normal new issue margin, and
                                (V)     thereafter, normal margin, and
                        (b)     where the new issue letter has not been drawn:
                                (I)     from settlement date to 20 business days after settlement date or when the
                                        new issue letter expires, whichever is earlier, 100% of normal new issue margin,
                                        and
                                (II)    thereafter, normal margin.
         (3)    Disaster out clause in effect - Where the commitment is subject to a disaster out clause (by the
                inclusion of this clause in the related underwriting agreement), the margin required is:
                (i)     from the effective date of the new issue letter to the business day prior to the settlement
                        date of the offering:
                        (a)     where the new issue letter has not expired, 10% of normal new issue margin,
                        (b)     where the disaster out clause has not expired, 50% of normal new issue margin, and
                        (c)     where the new issue letter and the disaster out clause have expired, normal new
                                issue margin,
                (ii)    from settlement date of the offering, the same as in clause 5521(2)(ii).
         (4)    Market out clause in effect - Where the commitment is subject to a market out clause (by the
                inclusion of this clause in the related underwriting agreement), the margin required is:
                (i)     from the effective date of the new issue letter to the business day prior to the settlement
                        date of the offering:
                        (a)     where the new issue letter and the market out clause have not expired, 5% of normal
                                new issue margin,
                        (b)     where the new issue letter has expired and the market out clause has not expired,
                                10% of normal new issue margin,
                        (c)     where the new issue letter has not expired and the market out clause has expired,
                                10% of normal new issue margin, and
                        (d)     where both the new issue letter and the market out clause have expired, normal new
                                issue margin,
                (ii)    from settlement date of the offering, the same as in clause 5521(2)(ii).
         (5)    Disaster out clause and market out clause in effect - Where the commitment is subject to a
                disaster out clause and a market out clause (by the inclusion of these clauses in the related
                underwriting agreement), the margin required is:
                (i)     from the effective date of the new issue letter to the business day prior to the settlement
                        date of the offering:



Series 5000 | Dealer Member Margin Rules                                                                         Rule 5500
                                                            Investment Dealer and Partially Consolidated Rules

                        (a)     where the new issue letter and the market out clause have not expired, 5% of normal
                                new issue margin,
                        (b)     where the new issue letter has expired and the market out clause has not expired,
                                10% of normal new issue margin,
                        (c)     where the new issue letter has not expired and the market out clause has expired,
                                10% of normal new issue margin,
                        (d)     where both the new issue letter and the market out clause have expired and the
                                disaster out clause has not expired, 50% of normal new issue margin, and
                        (e)     where the new issue letter, the market out clause and the disaster out clause have all
                                expired, normal new issue margin,
                (ii)    from settlement date of the offering, the same as in clause 5521(2)(ii).
         (6)    If the margin rates prescribed in subsections 5521(2) through 5521(5)in respect of commitments
                for which a new issue letter is available are less than the margin rates required by the issuer of
                such letter, the higher rates required by the issuer shall be applied.
5522. Margin requirements for underwriting commitments where expressions of interest from exempt
      purchasers have been affirmed
         (1)    Where a Dealer Member has a commitment in respect of a new issue of securities or a secondary
                issue of securities and the Dealer Member has determined through obtaining appropriate
                documentation:
                (i)     that the allocation between retail and exempt purchasers has been finalized,
                (ii)    that expressions of interest received from the entire allotment to exempt purchasers have
                        been verbally affirmed but not yet ticketed,
                (iii)   that there is unlikely to be a significant renege rate on the expressions of interest received
                        from exempt purchasers, and
                (iv)    that the Dealer Member is not significantly leveraging its underwriting activities through
                        the use of the margin requirement reduction provided on that portion of the commitment
                        where expressions of interest have been received from exempt purchasers,
                the minimum Dealer Member inventory margin requirement for the portion of the commitment
                allocated to exempt purchasers is calculated in accordance with subsections 5522(2) through
                5522(6).
         (2)    New issue letter has not been obtained and no out clauses in effect - Where the commitment is
                not subject to a market out clause or a disaster out clause (by the exclusion of these clauses from
                the related underwriting agreement) and a new issue letter has not been obtained or has expired,
                the margin required from the date that the expressions of interest received from the entire
                allotment to exempt purchasers have been verbally affirmed but not yet ticketed until the date
                the sales are contracted is:
                (i)     where the current market value of the commitment is at or above 90% of new issue value
                        (90% x issue price x number of shares), 20% of normal new issue margin,
                (ii)    where the current market value of the commitment is at or above 80% but below 90% of
                        new issue value (80% x issue price x number of shares), 40% of normal new issue margin,
                        and

Series 5000 | Dealer Member Margin Rules                                                                       Rule 5500
                                                             Investment Dealer and Partially Consolidated Rules

                (iii)   otherwise, normal new issue margin.
         (3)    New issue letter has not been obtained and disaster out clause in effect - Where the
                commitment is subject to a disaster out clause (by reference in the commitment to such clause
                being included in the underwriting agreement) and the disaster out clause has not expired and a
                new issue letter has not been obtained or has expired, the margin required is the lesser of:
                (i)     the margin required in subsection 5522(2), and
                (ii)    the margin required in subsection 5520(3).
         (4)    New issue letter has not been obtained and market out clause in effect - Where the
                commitment is subject to a market out clause (by the inclusion of this clause in the related
                underwriting agreement) and the market out clause has not expired and a new issue letter has
                not been obtained or has expired, the margin required is the same as in subsection 5520(4).
         (5)    New issue letter has not been obtained and disaster out clause and market out clause in effect -
                Where the commitment is subject to a disaster out clause and a market out clause (by the
                inclusion of these clauses in the related underwriting agreement) and the market out clause has
                not expired and a new issue letter has not been obtained or has expired, the margin required is
                the same as in subsection 5520(5).
         (6)    New issue letter has been obtained - Where a new issue letter has been obtained and the new
                issue letter has not expired, the margin required is the same as in section 5521.
5523. Alternative approach to margining of private placements of restricted equity securities during the
      distribution period
         (1)    For a private placement of an equity security subject to a four-month trading restriction (pursuant
                to National Instrument 45-102 or a similar provincial securities laws exemption), an alternative
                approach to margining is permitted. The alternative approach is set out in subsection 5523(2).
         (2)    The margin rate to be used for the private placement during the distribution period shall be the
                greater of:
                (i)     the margin rate that would be otherwise applicable to the security if the restriction were
                        not present, subject to the margin rate reductions available in sections 5520 through 5522,
                        and
                (ii)    (a)     where it is five business days or less subsequent to the commitment date, 25%,
                        (b)     where it is greater than five business days subsequent to the commitment date, 50%,
                                and
                        (c)     where it is on or after the offering settlement date, 100%.
5524. Margin requirements for a standby commitment to purchase securities under a rights offering
         (1)    The minimum Dealer Member inventory margin requirement for a standby commitment to
                purchase securities under a rights offering is calculated in accordance with subsection 5524(2).
         (2)    The margin required is:
                (i)     where the market value of the underlying security is greater than 125% of the subscription
                        amount, nil,



Series 5000 | Dealer Member Margin Rules                                                                     Rule 5500
                                                              Investment Dealer and Partially Consolidated Rules

                (ii)    where the market value of the underlying security is greater than 110% but less than or
                        equal to 125% of the subscription amount, 10% of the normal margin rate multiplied by the
                        subscription amount,
                (iii)   where the market value of the underlying security is greater than 105% but less than or
                        equal to 110% of the subscription amount, 30% of the normal margin rate multiplied by the
                        subscription amount,
                (iv)    where the market value of the underlying security is greater than 100% but less than or
                        equal to 105% of the subscription amount, 50% of the normal margin rate multiplied by the
                        subscription amount, and
                (v)     where the market value of the underlying security is less than or equal to 100% of the
                        subscription amount, the normal margin rate multiplied by the market value of the
                        underlying security.
5525. - 5529. Reserved.

UNDERWRITING RELATED AGREEMENTS
5530. New issue letter
         (1)    To obtain the reduced margin requirements in section 5521 for an underwriting commitment, a
                Dealer Member must be party to a new issue letter.
         (2)    In subsection 5130(5), a new issue letter is defined as an underwriting loan facility in a form
                satisfactory to the Corporation. For the letter to be satisfactory, it must contain the following
                minimum terms and conditions:
                (i)     the letter issuer must provide an irrevocable commitment to advance funds based only on
                        the strength of the new issue and the Dealer Member,
                (ii)    the letter issuer must advance funds to the Dealer Member for any part of the commitment
                        not sold, for an amount based on a stated loan value rate, at a stated interest rate, and for
                        a stated period of time,
                (iii)   the letter issuer must not, if the Dealer Member is unable to repay the loan at the
                        termination date resulting in a loss or potential loss to the letter issuer, have or seek any
                        right of set-off against:
                        (a)     collateral held by the letter issuer for any other obligations of the Dealer Member or
                                its clients,
                        (b)     cash on deposit with the letter issuer for any purpose, or
                        (c)     securities or other assets held in a custodial capacity by the letter issuer for the
                                Dealer Member’s own account or for the Dealer Member’s clients,
                        to recover the loss or potential loss.
         (3)    If the new issue letter issuer is not an acceptable institution, the funds that can be drawn under
                the new issue letter must either be fully collateralized by high-grade securities or held in escrow
                with an acceptable institution.
5531. - 5539. Reserved.



Series 5000 | Dealer Member Margin Rules                                                                           Rule 5500
                                                            Investment Dealer and Partially Consolidated Rules

INDIVIDUAL AND OVERALL UNDERWRITING CONCENTRATION CHARGES
5540. Individual underwriting concentration charge
         (1)    Where:
                (i)     the margin required on any one commitment is reduced due to either:
                        (a)     obtaining a new issue letter in accordance with section 5521, or
                        (b)     qualifying expressions of interest received from exempt purchasers that have been
                                verbally affirmed but not yet contracted in accordance with section 5522,
                and
                (ii)    the margin requirement reduction in respect of such commitment (determined by
                        comparing the margin requirement calculated in section 5521 or section 5522 with the
                        margin requirement otherwise applicable and calculated in section 5520), exceeds 40% of
                        such Dealer Member's net allowable assets,
                such excess shall be added to total margin required pursuant to Form 1. The amount to be
                deducted may be reduced by the amount of margin provided for as required by section 5521 or
                section 5522 on the individual underwriting position to which such excess relates.
5541. Overall underwriting concentration charge
         (1)    Where:
                (i)     the margin required on some or all commitments is reduced due to either:
                        (a)     obtaining a new issue letter in accordance with section 5521, or
                        (b)     qualifying expressions of interest received from exempt purchasers that have been
                                verbally affirmed but not yet contracted in accordance with section 5522,
                and
                (ii)    the aggregate margin requirement reductions in respect of such commitments (determined
                        by comparing the margin requirements calculated in section 5521 and section 5522 with
                        the margin requirements otherwise applicable and calculated in section 5520), exceeds
                        100% of such Dealer Member's net allowable assets,
                such excess shall be added to total margin required pursuant to Form 1. The amount to be
                deducted may be reduced by the amount of margin provided for as required by section 5521 and
                section 5522 above on individual underwriting positions and by the amount required to be
                deducted from risk adjusted capital pursuant to section 5540.
5542. - 5549. Reserved.

SPECIFIC OFFSET STRATEGIES INVOLVING COMMITMENTS TO PURCHASE
5550. Long qualifying basket of index securities - Short index participation units - Commitment to purchase
      index participation units
         (1)    Where a Dealer Member inventory account contains the following combination:
                           Long position                   Short position                    Commitment




Series 5000 | Dealer Member Margin Rules                                                                    Rule 5500
                                                            Investment Dealer and Partially Consolidated Rules

                 (i)       qualifying basket     and       index participation units and      commitment to
                           of index securities             based on the same                  purchase index
                                                           index                              participation units
                                                                                              pursuant to an
                                                                                              underwriting
                                                                                              agreement
                and equivalent quantities of each position in the combination are held, the minimum margin
                required for the combination is calculated in accordance with subsection 5550(2).
         (2)    No margin is required provided the long qualifying basket of index securities:
                (i)     is of size sufficient to comprise a basket of securities or multiple thereof required to obtain
                        the participation units,
                and
                (ii)    does not exceed the Dealer Member’s commitment to purchase the participation units.
5551. Long qualifying basket of index securities - Short index participation unit call options - Commitment to
      purchase index participation units
         (1)    Where a Dealer Member inventory account contains the following combination:
                           Long position                   Short option position               Commitment
                 (i)       qualifying basket     and       index participation        and      commitment to
                           of index securities             unit call option based              purchase index
                                                           on the same index                   participation units
                                                                                               pursuant to an
                                                                                               underwriting
                                                                                               agreement
                and equivalent quantities of each position in the combination are held and the underwriting
                period expires after the expiry date of the short call options, the minimum margin required for
                the combination is calculated in accordance with subsection 5551(2).
         (2)    Subject to additional margin requirements set out in subsection 5551(3), the minimum margin
                required is the normal margin required on the long qualifying basket less the market value of the
                short call options, but in no event shall the margin required be less than zero.
         (3)    Where the qualifying basket of index securities is imperfect, additional margin is required to be
                provided in the amount of the calculated incremental basket margin rate for the basket
                multiplied by the market value of the basket.
5552. Long qualifying basket of index securities - Long index participation unit put options - Commitment to
      purchase index participation units
         (1)    Where a Dealer Member inventory account contains the following combination:
                           Long position                  Long option position                Commitment
                 (i)       qualifying basket     and      index participation        and      commitment to
                           of index securities            unit put option based               purchase index
                                                          on the same index                   participation units

Series 5000 | Dealer Member Margin Rules                                                                        Rule 5500
                                                             Investment Dealer and Partially Consolidated Rules

                                                                                              pursuant to an
                                                                                              underwriting
                                                                                              agreement
                and equivalent quantities of each position in the combination are held and the underwriting
                period expires after the expiry date of the long put options, the minimum margin required for the
                combination is calculated in accordance with subsection 5552(2).
         (2)    Subject to additional margin requirements set out in subsection 5552(3), the minimum margin
                required is:
                (i)     100% of the market value of the long put options,
                plus
                (ii)    the lesser of:
                        (a)     the normal margin required on the long qualifying basket of index securities,
                        or
                        (b)     the market value of the qualifying basket of index securities less the aggregate
                                exercise value of the put options.
                        A negative value calculated under sub-clause 5552(2)(ii)(b) may reduce the margin required
                        on the put options, but in no event shall the margin required be less than zero.
         (3)    Where the qualifying basket of index securities is imperfect, additional margin is required to be
                provided in the amount of the calculated incremental basket margin rate for the basket
                multiplied by the market value of the basket.
5553. - 5559. Reserved.

MARGIN REQUIREMENTS FOR WHEN ISSUED TRADING POSITIONS
5560. Margin for short positions
         (1)    Subject to subsections 5560(2) and 5560(3), the minimum Dealer Member inventory margin and
                client account margin required for short positions resulting from short sales of a security traded
                on a when issued basis is the normal margin required for a short position in the security.
         (2)    Dealer Member inventory margin shall be posted on the trade date of the short sale.
         (3)    Client account margin shall be posted on the first settlement day after the trade date of the short
                sale.
5561. Margin for hedged positions
         (1)    Subject to subsections 5561(3) and 5561(4), the minimum Dealer Member inventory margin and
                client account margin required for hedged positions resulting from purchases of securities trading
                on a when issued basis that are subsequently sold on a when issued basis is the normal margin
                required for a long position in the security.
         (2)    Subject to subsections 5561(3) and 5561(4), the minimum Dealer Member inventory margin and
                client account margin required for hedged positions resulting from purchases of securities trading
                on a when issued basis that are subsequently sold for settlement into the regular market is the
                normal margin required for a short position in the security.


Series 5000 | Dealer Member Margin Rules                                                                        Rule 5500
                                                         Investment Dealer and Partially Consolidated Rules

         (3)    Dealer Member inventory margin shall be posted on the trade date of the purchase.
         (4)    Client account margin shall be posted on the first settlement day after the trade date of the sale.
5562. Margin for long positions
         (1)    Subject to subsections 5562(2) and 5562(3), the minimum Dealer Member inventory margin and
                client account margin required for long positions resulting from purchases of securities trading on
                a when issued basis that have not been sold subsequently on a when issued basis is the normal
                margin required for a long position in the security.
         (2)    Dealer Member inventory margin shall be posted on the trade date of the purchase.
         (3)    Client account margin shall be posted on the later of the first settlement day after the trade date
                of the purchase or the date of the issuance or distribution of the security.
5563. - 5599. Reserved.




Series 5000 | Dealer Member Margin Rules                                                                    Rule 5500
                                                               Investment Dealer and Partially Consolidated Rules

RULE 5600 | MARGIN REQUIREMENTS FOR OFFSET STRATEGIES INVOLVING DEBT AND EQUITY
            SECURITIES AND RELATED INSTRUMENTS

5601. Introduction
         (1)    Rule 5600 addresses the margin treatment of security positions that comprise reduced-risk offset
                strategies. The margin requirements for these strategies are generally less than if the positions
                are margined separately. Reduced margin in some cases is available for both Dealer Member
                inventory and client account offset strategies and in other cases is available for only Dealer
                Member inventory offset strategies.
         (2)    The order of subjects in Rule 5600 is:
                (i)     Dealer Member inventory and client account offset strategies involving:
                        (a)     debt securities:
                                (I)     government debt securities [sections 5610 through 5618],
                                (II)    commercial and corporate debt securities [sections 5620 through 5624], and
                                (III)   government debt securities and commercial and corporate debt securities
                                        [sections 5630 through 5631],
                        (b)     convertible and exercisable securities:
                                (I)     convertible securities [sections 5640 through 5644],
                                (II)    capital shares [sections 5650 to 5655], and
                                (III)   warrants, rights, installment receipts and other exercisable securities [sections
                                        5660 through 5663],
                        and
                (ii)    offsets only available for Dealer Member inventory positions:
                        (a)     debt securities [sections 5670 through 5671], and
                        (b)     swap positions [section 5680 through 5682].
5602. - 5609. Reserved.

DEALER MEMBER INVENTORY AND CLIENT ACCOUNT OFFSET STRATEGIES

OFFSETS INVOLVING GOVERNMENT DEBT SECURITIES AND RELATED INSTRUMENTS
5610. Summary reference tables
         (1)    The following reference table summarizes the reduced margin offset strategies available among
                government debt securities:




Series 5000 | Dealer Member Margin Rules                                                                           Rule 5600
                                                             Investment Dealer and Partially Consolidated Rules


                                       Short Canada        Short United      Short Canada       Short Canada
                                       debt securities     States debt       Provincial debt    Municipal debt
                                                           securities        securities         securities
                                       same maturity       same maturity     same maturity      same maturity
                                       band                band              band               band
                                       - 5611 and 5612     - 5614(3)(i)      - 5614(1)(i)       - 5614(1)(ii) and
                 Long Canada
                                                                                                  5614(3)(iii)
                 debt
                                       different           different         different          different
                 securities
                                       maturity bands      maturity bands    maturity bands     maturity bands
                                       - 5613(1)(i)        - no offset       - 5613(1)(ii)      - no offset
                                                             available                            available
                                       same maturity       same maturity     same maturity      same maturity
                                       band                band              band               band
                 Long United           - 5614(3)(i)        - 5611 and 5612   - 5614(3)(ii)      - 5614(3)(iv)
                 States debt           different           different         different          different
                 securities            maturity bands      maturity bands    maturity bands     maturity bands
                                       - no offset         - no offset       - no offset        - no offset
                                         available           available         available          available
                                       same maturity       same maturity     same maturity      same maturity
                                       band                band              band               band
                 Long Canada           - 5614(1)(i)        - 5614(3)(ii)     - 5611 and 5612    - 5614(1)(iii) and
                 Provincial                                                                       5614(3)(v)
                 debt                  different           different         different          different
                 securities            maturity bands      maturity bands    maturity bands     maturity bands
                                       - 5613(1)(ii)       - no offset       - 5613(1)(iii)     - no offset
                                                             available                            available
                                       same maturity       same maturity     same maturity      same maturity
                 Long Canada           band                band              band               band
                 Municipal             - 5614(1)(ii) and   - 5614(3)(iv)     - 5614(1)(iii) and - offset available
                 debt                    5614(3)(iii)                          5614(3)(v)         for long and
                 securities                                                                       short positions
                                                                                                  in same security




Series 5000 | Dealer Member Margin Rules                                                                      Rule 5600
                                                           Investment Dealer and Partially Consolidated Rules


                                       Short Canada      Short United      Short Canada       Short Canada
                                       debt securities   States debt       Provincial debt    Municipal debt
                                                         securities        securities         securities
                                       different         different         different          different
                                       maturity bands    maturity bands    maturity bands     maturity bands
                                       - no offset       - no offset       - no offset        - no offset
                                         available         available         available          available
         (2)    The following reference table summarizes the reduced margin offset strategies available between
                Canadian government debt securities and strip and residual debt instruments:
                                       Short Canada      Short Canada      Short Canada     Short Provincial
                                       debt securities   Provincial debt   strips or Canada strips or
                                                         securities        residuals        Provincial
                                                                                            residuals
                                                                           same issuer and same maturity
                                                                           maturity band   band
                                                                           - 5615(1)(i) and
                                                                             5615(1)(ii)      - 5615(2)(i) and
                 Long Canada
                                                                                                5615(2)(ii)
                 debt
                                                                           different issuers different
                 securities
                                                                           or maturity       maturity bands
                                                                           bands
                                           Refer to table in subsection    - no offset        - no offset
                                                     5610(1)                 available          available
                                                                           same maturity      same maturity
                                                                           band               band
                 Long Canada                                               - 5615(2)(iii) and - 5615(1)(v) and
                 Provincial                                                  5615(2)(iv)        5615(1)(vi)
                 debt                                                      different          different
                 securities                                                maturity bands     maturity bands
                                                                           - no offset        - no offset
                                                                             available          available




Series 5000 | Dealer Member Margin Rules                                                                    Rule 5600
                                                            Investment Dealer and Partially Consolidated Rules


                                       Short Canada       Short Canada        Short Canada     Short Provincial
                                       debt securities    Provincial debt     strips or Canada strips or
                                                          securities          residuals        Provincial
                                                                                               residuals
                                       same maturity      same maturity       same maturity      same maturity
                                       band               band                band               band
                                       - 5615(1)(i) and   - 5615(2)(iii) and - 5615(3)(i)        - 5615(4)(i)
                  Long Canada
                                         5615(1)(ii)        5615(2)(iv)        through             through
                  strips or
                                                                               5615(3)(iii)        5615(4)(iv)
                  Canada
                                       different          different           different          different
                  residuals
                                       maturity bands     maturity bands      maturity bands     maturity bands
                                       - no offset        - no offset         - no offset        - no offset
                                         available          available           available          available
                                       same maturity      same maturity       same maturity      same maturity
                                       band               band                band               band
                 Long                  - 5615(2)(i) and   - 5615(1)(v) and    - 5615(4)(i)       - 5615(3)(iv)
                 Provincial              5615(2)(ii)        5615(1)(vi)         through            through
                 strips or                                                      5615(4)(iv)        5615(3)(vi)
                 Provincial            different          different           different          different
                 residuals             maturity bands     maturity bands      maturity bands     maturity bands
                                       - no offset        - no offset         - no offset        - no offset
                                         available          available           available          available
         (3)    The following reference table summarizes the reduced margin offset strategies available between
                foreign federal government debt securities and foreign federal government strip and residual
                debt instruments:

                                                Short foreign federal         Short foreign federal government
                                                government debt               strips or foreign federal
                                                securities                    government residuals
                                                                              same issuer and maturity band
                 Long foreign federal
                                                Refer to table in subsection - 5615(1)(iii) and 5615(1)(iv)
                 government debt
                                                          5610(1)            different issuers or maturity bands
                 securities
                                                                              - no offset available
                  Short foreign federal         same issuer and maturity      same issuer and maturity band
                  government strips or          band

Series 5000 | Dealer Member Margin Rules                                                                       Rule 5600
                                                                Investment Dealer and Partially Consolidated Rules

                  foreign federal      - 5615(1)(iii) and 5615(1)(iv) - offset available for long and short
                  government residuals                                 positions in same security
                                                 different issuer or maturity different issuer or maturity bands
                                                 bands                        - no offset available
                                                 - no offset available
         (4)    The following reference table summarizes the reduced margin offset strategies available between
                Canadian government debt securities and Canadian government guaranteed mortgage-backed
                securities:
                                                 Short Canada debt securities    Short Canada mortgage-backed
                                                                                 securities
                                                                                 same maturity band
                 Long Canada debt                 Refer to table in subsection   - 5616(1)(i)
                 securities                                 5610(1)              different maturity bands
                                                                                 - no offset available
                                                 same maturity band              same maturity band
                                                 - 5616(1)(i)                    - offset available for long and short
                 Long Canada mortgage-                                             positions in same security
                 backed securities
                                                 different maturity bands        different maturity bands
                                                 - no offset available           - no offset available
         (5)    The following reference table summarizes the reduced margin offset strategies available between
                government debt securities and government debt futures contracts:

                                           Short Canada         Short Canada Short Canada                Short Canada
                                           debt securities      Provincial debt Municipal debt           bond futures
                                                                securities      securities
                                                                                                         same maturity
                                                                                                         band
                                                                                                         - 5617(1)(i)
                 Long Canada
                 debt securities                                                                         different
                                                                                                         maturity
                                                    Refer to table in subsection 5610(1)
                                                                                                         bands
                                                                                                         - 5618(1)(i)

                 Long Canada                                                                             same maturity
                 Provincial debt                                                                         band
                 securities                                                                              - 5618(1)(ii)

Series 5000 | Dealer Member Margin Rules                                                                          Rule 5600
                                                             Investment Dealer and Partially Consolidated Rules


                                           Short Canada      Short Canada Short Canada          Short Canada
                                           debt securities   Provincial debt Municipal debt     bond futures
                                                             securities      securities
                                                                                                different
                                                                                                maturity
                                                                                                bands
                                                                                                - 5618(1)(ii)
                                                                                                same maturity
                                                                                                band
                                                                                                - 5618(1)(iii)
                 Long Canada
                 Municipal debt                                                                 different
                 securities                                                                     maturity
                                                                                                bands
                                                                                                - no offset
                                                                                                  available
                                           same maturity     same maturity same maturity        same maturity
                                           band              band          band                 band -
                                           - 5617(1)(i)      - 5618(1)(ii)   - 5618(1)(iii)     • same contract
                                                                                                  - margin
                                                                                                  computed on
                                                                                                  the net long or
                                                                                                  net short
                                                                                                  contract
                                                                                                  position
                                                                                                • different
                                                                                                  contracts -
                 Long Canada                                                                      refer to
                 bond futures                                                                     requirements
                                                                                                  on exchange
                                                                                                  on which the
                                                                                                  contract trades

                                           different maturity different      different maturity different
                                           bands              maturity bands bands              maturity
                                           - 5618(1)(i)       - 5618(1)(ii)  - no offset        bands
                                                                              available         - refer to
                                                                                                  requirements
                                                                                                  on exchange
                                                                                                  on which the


Series 5000 | Dealer Member Margin Rules                                                                 Rule 5600
                                                             Investment Dealer and Partially Consolidated Rules


                                           Short Canada       Short Canada Short Canada                    Short Canada
                                           debt securities    Provincial debt Municipal debt               bond futures
                                                              securities      securities
                                                                                                           contract
                                                                                                           trades

5611. Government debt securities of same issuer and both maturing within one year
         (1)    Where a Dealer Member or a client:
                (i)     has a long position in Canada debt securities, United States debt securities, Canada
                        Provincial debt securities or any other debt security described in category (i) or category (ii)
                        of subsection 5210(1), maturing within one year, and
                (ii)    has a short position in debt securities:
                        (a)     issued or guaranteed by the same issuer (provided that for these purposes each of
                                the provinces of Canada shall be regarded as the same issuer as any other province of
                                Canada),
                        (b)     in the same currency as the securities referred to in clause 5611(1)(i),
                        (c)     maturing within one year, and
                        (d)     with a market value equal to the securities referred to in clause 5611(1)(i),
                the two positions may be offset and the minimum margin required for both positions may be
                computed as the excess of the normal margin required on the long (or short) position over the
                normal margin required on the short (or long) position.
5612. Government debt securities of same issuer with same maturity band and both maturing in greater
      than or equal to one year
         (1)    Where a Dealer Member or a client:
                (i)     has a long position in Canada debt securities, United States debt securities, Canada
                        Provincial debt securities or any other debt security described in category (i) or category (ii)
                        of subsection 5210(1), maturing in greater than or equal to one year, and
                (ii)    has a short position in debt securities:
                        (a)     issued or guaranteed by the same issuer (provided that for these purposes each of
                                the provinces of Canada shall be regarded as the same issuer as any other province of
                                Canada),
                        (b)     and in the same currency as the securities referred to in clause 5612(1)(i),
                        (c)     maturing within the same maturity band as the securities referred to in clause
                                5612(1)(i), and
                        (d)     with a market value equal to the securities referred to in clause 5612(1)(i),
                the two positions may be offset and the minimum margin required for both positions may be
                computed with respect to the net long or net short position only.




Series 5000 | Dealer Member Margin Rules                                                                          Rule 5600
                                                              Investment Dealer and Partially Consolidated Rules

5613. Government debt securities with different maturity bands
         (1)    Where a Dealer Member or a client has one of the following long government debt security
                position and short government debt security position pairings:
                           Long (short) position                                    Short (long) position
                 (i)       Canada debt securities                            and    Canada debt securities
                 (ii)      Canada debt securities                            and    Canada Provincial debt securities
                 (iii)     Canada Provincial debt securities                 and    Canada Provincial debt securities
                and the positions have the same currency denomination and market value but are within
                different maturity bands, the two positions may be offset and the minimum margin required for
                both positions may be computed as 50% of the greater of the margins normally required on the
                long (or short) and the short (or long) positions.
5614. Government debt securities of different issuers with same maturity band
         (1)    Where a Dealer Member or a client has one of the following long government debt security
                position and short government debt security position pairings:
                          Long (short) position                          Short (long) position
                 (i)      Canada debt securities                 and     Canada Provincial debt securities
                 (ii)     Canada debt securities                 and     highly rated Canada Municipal debt
                                                                         securities with a high issuer credit rating
                 (iii)    Canada Provincial debt securities      and     highly rated Canada Municipal debt
                                                                         securities with a high issuer credit rating
                and the positions have the same currency denomination and market value and are within the
                same maturity band, the two positions may be offset and the minimum margin required for both
                positions may be computed as 50% of the greater of the margins normally required on the long
                (or short) and the short (or long) positions.
         (2)    In subsection 5614(1) “Canada Municipal debt securities with a high issuer credit rating” are debt
                securities issued or guaranteed by a Canadian municipal government with a long-term issuer
                credit rating of “A” or higher by a designated rating organization.
         (3)    Where a Dealer Member or a client has one of the following long government debt security
                position and short government debt security position pairings:
                           Long (short) position                                    Short (long) position
                 (i)       Canada debt securities                      and          United States debt securities
                 (ii)      United States debt securities               and          Canada Provincial debt securities
                 (iii)     Canada debt securities                      and          Canada Municipal debt securities
                 (iv)      United States debt securities               and          Canada Municipal debt securities
                 (v)       Canada Provincial debt securities           and          Canada Municipal debt securities
                and the positions have the same currency denomination and market value and are within the
                same maturity band, the two positions may be offset and the minimum margin required for both


Series 5000 | Dealer Member Margin Rules                                                                         Rule 5600
                                                            Investment Dealer and Partially Consolidated Rules

                positions may be computed as the greater of the margins normally required on the long (or short)
                and the short (or long) positions.
5615. Offsets involving government debt securities and strip coupons or residuals
         (1)    Where a Dealer Member or a client has one of the following long (short) government debt
                security position and short (long) government strip coupon or residual position pairings:
                           Long (short) position                                  Short (long) position
                 (i)       Canada debt securities                           and   Canada strips
                 (ii)      Canada debt securities                           and   Canada residuals
                 (iii)     Federal government debt securities               and   Same federal government strips
                           eligible for margin pursuant to category (i)
                           of subsection 5210 (1)
                 (iv)      Federal government debt securities               and   Same federal government
                           eligible for margin pursuant to category (i)           residuals
                           of subsection 5210 (1)
                 (v)       Canada Provincial debt securities                and   Canada Provincial strips
                 (vi)      Canada Provincial debt securities                and   Canada Provincial residuals
                and the positions have the same currency denomination and market value and are within the
                same maturity band, the two positions may be offset and the minimum margin required for both
                positions may be computed as the excess of the normal margin required on the strip coupon or
                residual position over the normal margin required on the debt security position.
         (2)    Where a Dealer Member or a client has one of the following long (short) government debt
                security position and short (long) government strip coupon or government residual position
                pairings:
                           Long (short) position                                  Short (long) position
                 (i)       Canada debt securities                         and     Canada Provincial strips
                 (ii)      Canada debt securities                         and     Canada Provincial residuals
                 (iii)     Canada Provincial debt securities              and     Canada strips
                 (iv)      Canada Provincial debt securities              and     Canada residuals
                and the positions have the same currency denomination and market value and are within the
                same maturity band, the two positions may be offset and the minimum margin required for both
                positions may be computed as 50% of the total normal margin required for both positions.
         (3)    Where a Dealer Member or a client has one of the following government strip coupon or
                government residual position pairings:
                           Long (short) position                                  Short (long) position
                 (i)       Canada strips                                  and     Canada strips
                 (ii)      Canada residuals                               and     Canada residuals
                 (iii)     Canada strips                                  and     Canada residuals


Series 5000 | Dealer Member Margin Rules                                                                     Rule 5600
                                                            Investment Dealer and Partially Consolidated Rules

                 (iv)      Canada Provincial strips                    and         Canada Provincial strips
                 (v)       Canada Provincial residuals                 and         Canada Provincial residuals
                 (vi)      Canada Provincial strips                    and         Canada Provincial residuals
                and the positions have the same currency denomination and market value and are within the
                same maturity band, the two positions may be offset and the minimum margin required for both
                positions may be computed as the excess of the normal margin required on the long (or short)
                position over the normal margin required on the short (or long) position.
         (4)    Where a Dealer Member or a client has one of the following government strip coupon or
                government residual position pairings:
                           Long (short) position                                   Short (long) position
                 (i)       Canada strips                                and        Canada Provincial strips
                 (ii)      Canada strips                                and        Canada Provincial residuals
                 (iii)     Canada residuals                             and        Canada Provincial strips
                 (iv)      Canada residuals                             and        Canada Provincial residuals
                and the positions have the same currency denomination and market value and are within the
                same maturity band, the two positions may be offset and the minimum margin required for both
                positions may be computed as 50% of the total normal margin required for both positions.
5616. Offsets involving government debt securities and government guaranteed mortgage-backed securities
         (1)    Subject to subsection 5616(2), where a Dealer Member or a client has the following pairing:
                           Long (short) position                          Short (long) position
                 (i)       Canada debt securities                and      Canada guaranteed mortgage-backed
                                                                          securities
                and the positions have the same currency denomination and market value and are within the
                same maturity band, the two positions may be offset and the minimum margin required for both
                positions may be computed as the excess of the normal margin required on the mortgage-backed
                security position over the normal margin required on the debt security position.
         (2)    Where:
                (i)      the market value of the mortgage-backed securities position equals or exceeds the
                         remaining principal amount of such position, and
                (ii)     the mortgages underlying the mortgage-backed securities position are subject to being
                         repaid with or without penalty in full at the option of the mortgagee prior to maturity,
                the two positions may be offset and the minimum margin required for both positions may be
                computed as the greater of the normal margin required on the mortgage-backed security position
                and the normal margin required on the debt security position.
5617. Offsets involving government debt securities and Government of Canada notional bond futures
      contracts with same underlying issuer and same maturity bands
         (1)    Where a Dealer Member or a client has the following pairing:


Series 5000 | Dealer Member Margin Rules                                                                      Rule 5600
                                                             Investment Dealer and Partially Consolidated Rules

                           Long (short) position                          Short (long) position
                 (i)       Canada debt securities                 and     Government of Canada notional bond
                                                                          futures contract
                and the positions have the same currency denomination and market value and are within the
                same maturity band, the two positions may be offset and the minimum margin required for both
                positions may be computed with respect to the net long or net short position only.
         (2)    For a client account offset as set out in subsection 5617(1), the futures contracts must be
                excluded from the domestic gross customer margin model.
5618. Other offsets involving government debt securities and Government of Canada notional bond
      futures contracts
         (1)    Where a Dealer Member or a client has one of the following long (short) government debt
                security position and short (long) Government of Canada notional bond futures contract
                position pairings:
                           Long (short) position                          Short (long) position
                 (i)       Canada debt securities in different      and   Government of Canada notional bond
                           maturity band                                  futures contract
                 (ii)      Canada Provincial debt securities in     and   Government of Canada notional bond
                           same or different maturity band                futures contract
                 (iii)     Canada Municipal debt securities         and   Government of Canada notional bond
                           with a high issuer credit rating in            futures contract
                           same maturity band
                and the positions have the same currency denomination and market value, the two positions may
                be offset and the minimum margin required for both positions may be computed as 50% of the
                greater of the margins normally required on the long (or short) and the short (or long) positions.
         (2)    In subsection 5618(1) “Canada Municipal debt securities with a high issuer credit rating” are debt
                securities issued or guaranteed by a Canadian municipal government with a long-term issuer
                credit rating of “A” or higher by a designated rating organization.
         (3)    For a client account offset as set out in subsection 5618(1), the futures contracts must be
                excluded from the domestic gross customer margin model.
5619. Reserved.

OFFSETS INVOLVING COMMERCIAL AND CORPORATE DEBT SECURITIES AND RELATED INSTRUMENTS
5620. Summary reference tables
         (1)    The following reference table summarizes the reduced margin offset strategies available among
                commercial and corporate debt securities:




Series 5000 | Dealer Member Margin Rules                                                                      Rule 5600
                                                              Investment Dealer and Partially Consolidated Rules


                                           Short commercial and Short Canadian               Short Canadian
                                           corporate debt       chartered bank               bankers acceptance
                                           securities           acceptances                  futures contracts
                                           same maturity band       same maturity band       same maturity band
                                 - offset available for             - no offset available    - no offset available
                                   securities of same
                 Long commercial issuer
                 and corporate
                                 - 5621(1)(i)
                 debt securities
                                 different maturity                 different maturity       different maturity
                                 bands                              bands                    bands
                                           - no offset available    - no offset available    - no offset available
                                           same maturity band       same maturity band       same maturity band
                                           - no offset available    - offset available for   - 5622(1)(i)
                 Long Canadian
                                                                      same security only
                 chartered bank
                                           different maturity       different maturity       different maturity
                 acceptances
                                           bands                    bands                    bands
                                           - no offset available    - no offset available    - no offset available
                                           same maturity band       same maturity band       same maturity band -
                                           - no offset available    - 5622(1)(i)             • same contract - margin
                                                                                               computed on the net
                                                                                               long or net short
                                                                                               contract position
                                                                                             • different contracts -
                 Long Canadian                                                                 refer to requirements
                 bankers                                                                       on exchange on which
                                                                                               the contract trades
                 acceptance
                                   different maturity               different maturity       different maturity
                 futures contracts
                                   bands                            bands                    bands
                                           - no offset available    - no offset available    - refer to
                                                                                               requirements on
                                                                                               exchange on which
                                                                                               the contract trades

         (2)    The following reference table summarizes the reduced margin offset strategies available between
                commercial and corporate debt securities and strip and residual debt instruments:




Series 5000 | Dealer Member Margin Rules                                                                     Rule 5600
                                                             Investment Dealer and Partially Consolidated Rules


                                           Short commercial and corporate Short commercial and corporate
                                           debt                           debt strips or residuals
                                                                               same maturity band
                                                                               - offset available where strip or
                 Long commercial                                                 residual is of the same issuer
                                              Refer to table in subsection
                 and corporate
                                                        5620(1)                - 5623(1)(i)
                 debt
                                                                               different maturity bands
                                                                              - no offset available
                                           same maturity band                  same maturity band
                 Long commercial - offset available where strip or             - offset available for long and
                 and corporate     residual is of the same issuer                short positions in same strip or
                 debt strips or  - 5623(1)(i)                                    same residual
                 residuals       different maturity bands                      different maturity bands
                                           - no offset available               - no offset available
         (3)    The following reference table summarizes the reduced margin offset strategies available between
                commercial and corporate debt securities and government debt futures contracts:

                                           Short commercial and corporate Short Canada bond futures
                                           debt
                                                                               same maturity band
                 Long commercial                                               - 5624(1)(i)
                                              Refer to table in subsection
                 and corporate
                                                        5620(1)                different maturity bands
                 debt
                                                                               - no offset available
                                           same maturity band
                 Long Canada               - 5624(1)(i)                           Refer to table in subsection
                 bond futures              different maturity bands                         5610(5)
                                           - no offset available

5621. Commercial and corporate debt securities of same issuer with same maturity band
         (1)    Where a Dealer Member or a client has the following pairing:
                           Long (short) position                                 Short (long) position
                 (i)       highly rated non-convertible commercial      and      highly rated non-convertible
                           and corporate debt securities                         commercial and corporate debt
                                                                                 securities of the same issuer


Series 5000 | Dealer Member Margin Rules                                                                    Rule 5600
                                                           Investment Dealer and Partially Consolidated Rules

                and the positions have the same currency denomination and market value and are within the
                same maturity band, the two positions may be offset and the minimum margin required for both
                positions may be computed as the greater of the margins normally required on the long (or short)
                and the short (or long) positions.
         (2)    In subsection 5621(1) “highly rated non-convertible commercial and corporate debt securities”
                are non-convertible commercial and corporate debt securities currently rated “A” or higher by a
                designated rating organization.
5622. Offsets involving Canadian chartered bank acceptances and Canadian bankers acceptance futures
      contracts with same maturity bands
         (1)    Where a Dealer Member or a client has the following pairing:
                           Long (short) position                            Short (long) position
                 (i)       highly rated chartered bank       and            Canadian banker acceptance futures
                           acceptances                                      contract
                and the positions have the same currency denomination and market value and are within the
                same maturity band, the two positions may be offset and the minimum margin required for both
                positions may be computed with respect to the net long or net short position only.
         (2)    In subsection 5622(1) “highly rated chartered bank acceptances” are bank acceptances currently
                rated “A” or higher by a designated rating organization.
         (3)    For a client account offset as set out in subsection 5622(1), the futures contracts must be
                excluded from the domestic gross customer margin model.
5623. Offsets involving commercial and corporate debt securities and strip coupons or residuals
         (1)    Where a Dealer Member or a client has the following pairing:
                           Long (short) position                    Short (long) position
                 (i)       highly rated non-convertible      and    strips or residuals whose underlier is highly
                           commercial                               rated non-convertible commercial and
                           and corporate debt securities            corporate debt securities of the same issuer
                and the positions have the same currency denomination and market value and are within the
                same maturity band, the minimum margin required for both positions may be computed as the
                greater of the margins normally required on the long (or short) and the short (or long) positions,
                subject to a maximum margin rate requirement of 20%.
         (2)    In subsection 5623(1) “highly rated non-convertible commercial and corporate debt securities”
                are non-convertible commercial and corporate debt securities currently rated “A” or higher by a
                designated rating organization.
5624. Offsets involving commercial and corporate debt securities and Government of Canada notional bond
      futures contracts
         (1)    Where a Dealer Member or a client has one of the following long (short) commercial and
                corporate debt security position and short (long) Government of Canada notional bond futures
                contract position pairings:


Series 5000 | Dealer Member Margin Rules                                                                      Rule 5600
                                                             Investment Dealer and Partially Consolidated Rules

                           Long (short) position                                   Short (long) position
                 (i)       highly rated non-convertible commercial        and      Government of Canada notional
                           and corporate debt securities                           bond futures contract
                and the positions have the same currency denomination and market value and are within the
                same maturity band, the two positions may be offset and the minimum margin required for both
                positions may be computed as the greater of the margins normally required on the long (or short)
                and the short (or long) positions.
         (2)    In subsection 5624(1) “highly rated non-convertible commercial and corporate debt securities”
                are non-convertible commercial and corporate debt securities currently rated “A” or higher by a
                designated rating organization.
         (3)    For a client account offset as set out in subsection 5624(1), the futures contracts must be
                excluded from the domestic gross customer margin model.
5625. - 5629. Reserved.

OFFSETS INVOLVING GOVERNMENT AND COMMERCIAL AND CORPORATE DEBT SECURITIES AND RELATED
      INSTRUMENTS
5630. Summary reference table
         (1)     The following reference table summarizes the reduced margin offset strategies available
                 between government debt securities and commercial and corporate debt securities:
                                           Short Canada      Short United       Short Canada       Short
                                           debt securities   States treasury    Provincial debt    commercial and
                                                             debt securities    securities         corporate debt
                                                                                                   securities
                                                                                                   same maturity
                                                                                                   band
                                                                                                   - 5631(1)(i)
                 Long Canada
                                                                                                   different
                 debt securities
                                                                                                   maturity bands
                                                                                                   - no offset
                                                   Refer to table in subsection 5610(1)
                                                                                                     available
                                                                                                   same maturity
                 Long United                                                                       band
                 States treasury                                                                   - 5631(1)(ii)
                 debt securities                                                                   different
                                                                                                   maturity bands



Series 5000 | Dealer Member Margin Rules                                                                      Rule 5600
                                                             Investment Dealer and Partially Consolidated Rules


                                           Short Canada      Short United        Short Canada         Short
                                           debt securities   States treasury     Provincial debt      commercial and
                                                             debt securities     securities           corporate debt
                                                                                                      securities
                                                                                                      - no offset
                                                                                                        available
                                                                                                      same maturity
                                                                                                      band
                 Long Canada                                                                          - 5631(1)(iii)
                 Provincial debt                                                                      different
                 securities                                                                           maturity bands
                                                                                                      - no offset
                                                                                                        available
                                           same maturity     same maturity       same maturity
                                           band              band                band
                 Long
                                - 5631(1)(i)                 - 5631(1)(ii)       - 5631(1)(iii)       Refer to table in
                 commercial and
                                different                    different           different              subsection
                 corporate debt
                                maturity bands               maturity bands      maturity bands           5620(1)
                 securities
                                - no offset                  - no offset         - no offset
                                  available                    available           available

5631. Government and commercial corporate debt securities with same maturity band
         (1)    Where a Dealer Member or a client has one of the following long (short) government and short
                (long) commercial and corporate debt security position pairings:
                           Long (short) position                              Short (long) position
                 (i)       Canada debt securities                 and         highly rated non-convertible commercial
                                                                              and corporate debt securities
                 (ii)      United States treasury debt            and         highly rated non-convertible commercial
                           securities                                         and corporate debt securities
                 (iii)     Canada Provincial debt securities      and         highly rated non-convertible commercial
                                                                              and corporate debt securities
                and the positions have the same currency denomination and market value and are within the
                same maturity band, the two positions may be offset and the minimum margin required for both
                positions may be computed as the greater of the margins normally required on the long (or short)
                and the short (or long) positions.



Series 5000 | Dealer Member Margin Rules                                                                         Rule 5600
                                                             Investment Dealer and Partially Consolidated Rules

         (2)    In subsection 5631(1) “highly rated non-convertible commercial and corporate debt securities”
                are non-convertible commercial and corporate debt securities currently rated “A” or higher by a
                designated rating organization.
5632. - 5639. Reserved.

OFFSETS INVOLVING CONVERTIBLE SECURITIES
5640. Summary reference table
         (1)     The following reference table summarizes the basic reduced margin offset strategies available for
                 convertible securities:

                                                       Short convertible security     Short underlying security


                                                       currently convertible          currently convertible
                                                       - offset available for long    - offset available where:
                                                         and short positions in the    • convertible into the
                                                         same security                   underlying security - 5641(1)(i)
                                                                                       • convertible into the cash
                                                                                         equivalent of the unit value of
                 Long convertible security                                               the underlying security -
                                                                                         5641(1)(i) and 5641(1)(ii)

                                                       not currently convertible      not currently convertible
                                                       - offset available for long   - 5642(1)
                                                         and short positions in same
                                                         security
                                                        offset available              offset available for long and
                 Long underlying security               - 5643(1)                     short positions in the same
                                                                                      security
         (2)     Other reduced margin offset strategies available for convertible securities:
                (i)     offset relating to a pending amalgamation, acquisition, spin-off or other securities related
                        reorganization transaction - 5644
5641. Offset where convertible security is held long and is currently convertible
         (1)    Where a Dealer Member or a client holds a long position in a convertible security which is
                currently convertible and a short position in the underlying security and equivalent quantities of
                both positions are held, the two positions may be offset and the minimum margin required for
                both positions may be computed as the sum of:
                (i)     the conversion loss, if any,
                and



Series 5000 | Dealer Member Margin Rules                                                                        Rule 5600
                                                           Investment Dealer and Partially Consolidated Rules

                (ii)    if the convertible security cannot be converted directly into the underlying security at the
                        holder’s option, 20% of the normal margin required on the underlying security.
5642. Offset where convertible security is held long and is not currently convertible
         (1)    Where a Dealer Member or a client holds a long position in a convertible security which is not
                currently convertible and a short position in the underlying security and equivalent quantities of
                both positions are held, the two positions may be offset and the minimum margin required for
                both positions may be computed as the sum of:
                (i)     the conversion loss, if any,
                and
                (ii)    40% of the normal margin required on the underlying security.
5643. Offset where convertible security is held short
         (1)    Where a Dealer Member or a client holds a long position in the underlying security and a short
                position in a convertible security and equivalent quantities of both positions are held, the two
                positions may be offset and the minimum margin required for both positions may be computed
                as the sum of:
                (i)     the conversion loss, if any,
                and
                (ii)    40% of the normal margin required on the underlying security.
5644. Offset relating to a pending amalgamation, acquisition, spin-off or other securities related
      reorganization transaction
         (1)    Where a Dealer Member or a client holds a long position in Oldco securities and short position in
                Newco securities and equivalent quantities of both positions are held and the pending
                reorganization that resulted in the creation of the Newco securities has received approval to
                proceed, the two positions may be offset and the minimum margin required for both positions
                may be computed as the excess of the combined market value of the Oldco securities over the
                combined market value of the Newco securities, if any.
         (2)    For the purposes of subsection 5644(1), “approval to proceed” means that:
                (i)     all legal requirements to proceed with the reorganization have been met,
                (ii)    all regulatory, competition bureau and court approvals to proceed with the reorganization
                        have been received, and
                (iii)   the Oldco securities will be cancelled and replaced by an equivalent number of Newco
                        securities within 20 business days.
5645. - 5649. Reserved.




Series 5000 | Dealer Member Margin Rules                                                                       Rule 5600
                                                          Investment Dealer and Partially Consolidated Rules

OFFSETS INVOLVING CAPITAL SHARES
5650. Summary reference tables
         (1)    The following reference table summarizes the basic reduced margin offset strategies available for
                capital shares:

                                           Short capital share,   Short capital share Short underlying
                                           with a conversion      and short split share security
                                           feature                preferred share,
                                                                  both with a
                                                                  conversion feature
                                           offset available for   offset available for  capital share can be
                                           long and short         long and short        converted into
                                           positions in same      positions in same     underlying security
                                           capital share          capital share.        - 5651(1)(i)
                                                                  Normal margin to be
                 Long capital share,                                                    capital share can be
                                                                  provided on short
                 with a conversion
                                                                  split share preferred converted into cash
                 feature                                                                equivalent of unit
                                                                  share position
                                                                                        value of underlying
                                                                                        security
                                                                                          - 5651(1)(i) and
                                                                                            5651(1)(ii)
                                           offset available for  offset available for     capital share and
                                           long and short        long and short           split share preferred
                                           positions in same     positions in same        share can be
                                           capital share.        capital share and        converted into
                                           Normal margin to be same split share           underlying security
                                           provided on long      preferred share          - 5652(1)(i)
                 Long capital share
                                           split share preferred
                 and long split share                                                     capital share and
                                           share position
                 preferred share,                                                         split share preferred
                 both with a                                                              share can be
                 conversion feature                                                       converted into cash
                                                                                          equivalent of unit
                                                                                          value of underlying
                                                                                          security
                                                                                          - 5652(1)(i) and
                                                                                            5651(2)(ii)



Series 5000 | Dealer Member Margin Rules                                                                  Rule 5600
                                                              Investment Dealer and Partially Consolidated Rules


                                              Short capital share,      Short capital share Short underlying
                                              with a conversion         and short split share security
                                              feature                   preferred share,
                                                                        both with a
                                                                        conversion feature
                                              offset available          offset available       offset available for
                 Long underlying              - 5653(1)                 - 5654(1)              long and short
                 security                                                                      positions in same
                                                                                               underlying security
         (2)    Other reduced margin offset strategies available for capital shares:
                (i)     offset involving long capital share and short call option contract positions - 5655
5651. Offset involving long capital share and short underlying common share positions
         (1)    Where a Dealer Member or a client holds a long capital share position and a short underlying
                common share position and equivalent quantities of both positions are held, the two positions
                may be offset and the minimum margin required for both positions may be computed as the sum
                of:
                (i)     lesser of:
                        (a)     the sum of:
                                (I)    the capital share conversion loss, if any, and
                                (II)   the normal margin required on the equivalent quantity of split share preferred
                                       shares,
                        and
                        (b)     the normal margin required on the underlying common shares,
                and
                (ii)    if the capital shares cannot be delivered to the split share company for retraction directly
                        into the underlying security at the holder’s option, 20% of the margin otherwise required
                        on the underlying common shares.
5652. Offset involving long capital share, long split share preferred share and short underlying common
      share positions
         (1)    Where a Dealer Member or a client holds a long capital share position, a long split share preferred
                share position and a short underlying common share position and equivalent quantities of all
                positions are held, the three positions may be offset and the minimum margin required for all
                positions may be computed as the sum of:
                (i)     lesser of:
                        (a)     the combined conversion loss, if any, and
                        (b)     the normal margin required on the underlying common shares,
                and



Series 5000 | Dealer Member Margin Rules                                                                       Rule 5600
                                                              Investment Dealer and Partially Consolidated Rules

                (ii)    if the capital shares cannot be delivered to the split share company for retraction directly
                        into the underlying security at the holder’s option, 20% of the margin otherwise required
                        on the underlying common shares.
5653. Offset involving short capital share and long underlying common share positions
         (1)    Where a Dealer Member or a client holds a short capital share position and a long underlying
                common share position and equivalent quantities of both positions are held, the two positions
                may be offset and the minimum margin required for both positions may be computed as the sum
                of:
                (i)     lesser of:
                        (a)     the sum of:
                                (I)    the capital share conversion loss, if any, and
                                (II)   the normal margin required on the equivalent quantity of split share preferred
                                       shares,
                        and
                        (b)     the normal margin required on the underlying common shares,
                and
                (ii)    40% of the normal margin required on the underlying common shares.
5654. Offset involving short capital share, short split share preferred share and long underlying common
      share positions
         (1)    Where a Dealer Member or a client holds a short capital share position, a short split share
                preferred share position and a long underlying common share position and equivalent quantities
                of all positions are held, the three positions may be offset and the minimum margin required for
                all positions may be computed as the sum of:
                (i)     lesser of:
                        (a)     the combined conversion loss, if any, and
                        (b)     the normal margin required on the underlying common shares,
                and
                (ii)    40% of the normal margin required on the underlying common shares.
5655. Offset involving long capital share and short call option contract positions
         (1)    Where a Dealer Member or a client holds a long capital share position and a short call option
                contract position expiring on or before the redemption date of the capital shares and equivalent
                quantities of both positions are held, the two positions may be offset and the minimum margin
                required for both positions may be computed as the sum of:
                (i)     lesser of:
                        (a)     the normal margin required on the capital share position less the market value of the
                                call option contract position, provided that the net amount may not be less than
                                zero,
                        and



Series 5000 | Dealer Member Margin Rules                                                                       Rule 5600
                                                            Investment Dealer and Partially Consolidated Rules

                        (b)     any excess of the market value of the underlying common shares over the aggregate
                                exercise value of the call option contract position,
                and
                (ii)    the capital share conversion loss, if any,
                and
                (iii)   if the capital shares cannot be delivered to the split share company for retraction directly
                        into the underlying security at the holder’s option, 20% of the normal margin required on
                        the underlying common shares.
5656. - 5659. Reserved.

OFFSETS INVOLVING WARRANTS, RIGHTS, INSTALLMENT RECEIPTS AND OTHER EXERCISABLE SECURITIES
5660. Summary reference tables
         (1)    The following reference table summarizes the basic reduced margin offset strategies available for
                exercisable securities:

                                                     Short exercisable security       Short underlying security
                                                     currently exercisable            currently exercisable
                                                     - offset available for long   - offset available where:
                                                       and short positions in same • exercisable security can be
                                                       security                        exercised into underlying
                                                                                          security
                                                                                          - 5661(1)(i) and
                                                                                            5661(1)(ii)
                                                                                       • exercisable security can be
                 Long exercisable security                                               exercised into cash equivalent
                                                                                         of unit value of underlying
                                                                                         security
                                                                                          - 5661(1)(i) through
                                                                                            5661(1)(iii)
                                                     not currently exercisable        not currently exercisable
                                                     - offset available for long   - 5662(1)
                                                       and short positions in same
                                                       security
                                                     offset available                 offset available for long and
                 Long underlying security            - 5663(1)                        short positions in same
                                                                                      security




Series 5000 | Dealer Member Margin Rules                                                                       Rule 5600
                                                           Investment Dealer and Partially Consolidated Rules

5661. Offset where exercisable security is held long and is currently exercisable
         (1)    Where a Dealer Member or a client holds a long position in an exercisable security which is
                currently exercisable and a short position in the underlying security and equivalent quantities of
                both positions are held, the two positions may be offset and the minimum margin required for
                both positions may be computed as the sum of:
                (i)     the exercise loss, if any,
                and
                (ii)    for client account positions, the amount of the exercise or subscription payment,
                and
                (iii)   if the exercisable security cannot be converted directly into the underlying security at the
                        holder’s option, 20% of the normal margin required on the underlying securities.
5662. Offset where exercisable security is held long and is not currently exercisable
         (1)    Where a Dealer Member or a client holds a long position in an exercisable security which is not
                currently exercisable and a short position in the underlying security and equivalent quantities of
                both positions are held, the two positions may be offset and the minimum margin required for
                both positions may be computed as the sum of:
                (i)     the exercise loss, if any,
                and
                (ii)    for client account positions, the amount of the exercise or subscription payment,
                and
                (iii)   40% of the margin otherwise required on the underlying securities.
5663. Offset where exercisable security is held short
         (1)    Where a Dealer Member or a client holds a long position in the underlying security and a short
                position in an exercisable security and equivalent quantities of both positions are held, the two
                positions may be offset and the minimum margin required for both positions may be computed
                as the sum of:
                (i)     the exercise loss, if any,
                and
                (ii)    for client account positions, the amount of the exercise or subscription payment,
                and
                (iii)   40% of the margin otherwise required on the underlying securities.
5664. - 5669. Reserved.




Series 5000 | Dealer Member Margin Rules                                                                       Rule 5600
                                                             Investment Dealer and Partially Consolidated Rules

OFFSETS ONLY AVAILABLE FOR DEALER MEMBER INVENTORY POSITIONS

DEBT SECURITIES
5670. Offsets involving callable, extendible and retractable debt securities
         (1)    Where a Dealer Member holds a position in callable, extendible or retractable debt securities they
                may elect to use a different maturity date for reduced margin offset purposes than the original
                maturity date of the security if the applicable conditions in the chart below are met:

                  Security                 Condition                           Maturity date election

                  (i) Callable debt Market value of security at or             Original maturity date
                      security      below 101% of call value

                                           Market value of security greater    First business day after expiry
                                           than 101% of the call value         date of call protection period

                  (ii) Extendible    Extension election period has not         Original maturity date
                       debt security expired and security is trading at
                                     or below the:
                                           extension factor x current
                                           principal amount

                                           Extension election period has not   Extension maturity date
                                           expired and security is trading
                                           above the:
                                           extension factor x current
                                           principal amount

                                           Extension election period has       Original maturity date
                                           expired

                  (iii) Retractable Retraction election period has not Original maturity date
                        debt security expired and security is trading at
                                      or above the:
                                           retraction factor x current
                                           principal amount

                                           Retraction election period has not Retraction maturity date
                                           expired and security is trading
                                           below the:




Series 5000 | Dealer Member Margin Rules                                                                   Rule 5600
                                                             Investment Dealer and Partially Consolidated Rules


                  Security                 Condition                             Maturity date election
                                           retraction factor x current
                                           principal amount

                                           Retraction election period has        Original maturity date
                                           expired

5671. Offsets involving Canadian government debt or Canadian listed equity securities and futures and
      forward contracts
         (1)    Where a Dealer Member has a position in bonds, debentures or treasury bills issued or
                guaranteed by the Government of Canada or in equity securities listed on the Toronto Stock
                Exchange and the account has an offsetting futures or forward contract position on the same
                security, the positions may be offset and the minimum margin required for the positions may be
                computed with respect to the net long or net short position only.
5672. – 5679. Reserved.

OFFSETS ONLY AVAILABLE FOR DEALER MEMBER INVENTORY POSITIONS

SWAP POSITIONS
5680. Offset involving two interest rate swap positions
         (1)    Where a Dealer Member inventory account contains the following pairing:
                (i)     a position in one or more interest rate swaps requiring it to pay (or entitling it to receive)
                        Canadian dollar or United States dollar fixed (or floating) interest rate amounts,
                and
                (ii)    another position in one or more interest rate swaps entitling it to receive (or requiring it to
                        pay) a fixed (or floating) interest rate amount denominated in the same currency and
                        within the same maturity band for margin purposes as the interest rate swap or swaps
                        referred to in clause 5680(1)(i),
                the two positions in clauses 5680(1)(i) and 5680(1)(ii) may be offset and the minimum margin
                required for both positions may be computed as the net of the normal margin required for each
                position, provided that the normal margin required on the fixed interest rate payment (or receipt)
                component position may only be offset against the normal margin required on the fixed interest
                rate receipt (or payment) component position, and the normal margin required on the floating
                interest rate payment (or receipt) component position may only be offset against the normal
                margin required on the floating interest rate receipt (or payment) component position.
5681. Offsets involving interest rate swaps and federal government debt security positions
         (1)    Offset involving fixed interest rate swap component and federal government debt security
                positions - Where a Dealer Member inventory account contains the following pairing:
                (i)     a position in one or more interest rate swaps requiring it to pay (or entitling it to receive)
                        Canadian dollar or United States dollar fixed interest rate amounts,

Series 5000 | Dealer Member Margin Rules                                                                         Rule 5600
                                                            Investment Dealer and Partially Consolidated Rules

                and
                (ii)    a long (or short) position in Canada debt securities, United States debt securities, or any
                        other debt securities described in category (i) of subsection 5210(1) denominated in the
                        same currency as the interest rate swap or swaps and with a term to maturity that is within
                        the same maturity band for margin purposes as the interest rate swap or swaps,
                the two positions in clauses 5681(1)(i) and 5681(1)(ii) may be offset and the minimum margin
                required for both positions may be computed as the net of the normal margin required for each
                position. Any margin requirement calculated for the separate floating interest rate receipt (or
                payment) component position will continue to be required unless that position separately
                qualifies for the offset set out in subsection 5681(2).
         (2)    Offset involving floating interest rate swap component and federal government debt security
                positions - Where a Dealer Member inventory account contains the following pairing:
                (i)     a position in one or more interest rate swaps requiring it to pay (or entitling it to receive)
                        Canadian dollar or United States dollar floating interest rate amounts,
                and
                (ii)    a long (or short) position in Canada debt securities, United States debt securities, or any
                        other debt securities described in category (i) of subsection 5210(1) denominated in the
                        same currency as the interest rate swap or swaps and maturing within one year,
                the two positions in clauses 5681(2)(i) and 5681(2)(ii) may be offset and the minimum margin
                required for both positions may be computed as the net of the normal margin required in respect
                of the positions. Any margin requirement calculated for the separate fixed interest rate receipt
                (or payment) component position will continue to be required unless that position qualifies for
                the offset set out in subsection 5681(1).
5682. Offset involving two total performance swap positions
         (1)    Where a Dealer Member inventory account contains the following pairing:
                (i)     a position in one or more total performance swaps requiring it to pay (or entitling it to
                        receive) Canadian dollar or United States dollar amounts calculated based on the
                        performance of a stipulated underlying security or basket of securities,
                and
                (ii)    another position in one or more total performance swaps entitling it to receive (or
                        requiring it to pay) amounts calculated based on the performance of the same underlying
                        security or basket of securities and denominated in the same currency,
                 the two positions in clauses 5682(1)(i) and 5682(1)(ii) may be offset and the minimum margin
                 required for both positions may be computed as the net of the normal margin required for each
                 position, provided that the normal margin required on the performance payment (or receipt)
                 component position may only be offset against the normal margin required on the performance
                 receipt (or payment) component position, and the normal margin required on the floating
                 interest rate payment (or receipt) component position may only be offset against the normal
                 margin required on the floating interest rate receipt (or payment) component position.




Series 5000 | Dealer Member Margin Rules                                                                         Rule 5600
                                                              Investment Dealer and Partially Consolidated Rules

5683. Offsets involving total performance swaps and underlying security positions
         (1)    Offset involving short total performance swap component and long underlying security
                positions - Where a Dealer Member inventory account contains the following pairing:
                (i)     a short position in one or more total performance swaps,
                and
                (ii)    a long position in the same underlying security or basket of securities,
                the two positions in clauses 5683(1)(i) and 5683(1)(ii) may be offset and the minimum margin
                required for both positions may be computed as either:
                (iii)   where it can be demonstrated that sell-out risk relating to the offset has been mitigated:
                        (a)     through the inclusion of a realization clause in the total performance swap, which
                                allows the Dealer Member to close out the swap using the sell-out price for the long
                                position in the underlying security or basket of securities, or
                        (b)     since, due to the features inherent in the long position in the underlying security or
                                basket of securities or the market on which the underlying security or basket of
                                securities trades, the realization value of the long position in the underlying security
                                or basket of securities is determinable at the time the total performance swap is to
                                expire and this value will be used as the closeout price for the swap,
                        the net of the normal margin required for each position.
                or
                (iv)    where sell-out risk relating to the offset has not been mitigated, the net of the normal
                        margin required for each position plus 20% of the normal margin required on the hedged
                        portion of the long position in the underlying security or basket of securities.
         (2)    Offset involving long total performance swap component and short underlying security
                positions - Where a Dealer Member inventory account contains the following pairing:
                (i)     a long position in one or more total performance swaps,
                and
                (ii)    a short position in the same underlying security or basket of securities,
                the two positions in clauses 5682(3)(i) and 5682(3)(ii) may be offset and the minimum margin
                required for both positions may be computed as either:
                (iii)   where it can be demonstrated that buy-in risk relating to the offset has been mitigated:
                        (a)     through the inclusion of a realization clause in the total performance swap, which
                                allows the Dealer Member to close out the swap using the buy-in price for the short
                                position in the underlying security or basket of securities, or
                        (b)     since, due to the features inherent in the short position in the underlying security or
                                basket of securities or the market on which the underlying security or basket of
                                securities trades, the realization value of the short position in the underlying security
                                or basket of securities is determinable at the time the total performance swap is to
                                expire and this value will be used as the closeout price for the swap,
                        the net of the normal margin required for each position.
                 or


Series 5000 | Dealer Member Margin Rules                                                                          Rule 5600
                                                         Investment Dealer and Partially Consolidated Rules

                (iv)    where buy-in risk relating to the offset has not been mitigated, the net of the normal
                        margin required for each position plus 20% of the normal margin required on the hedged
                        portion of the short position in the underlying security or basket of securities.
5684. – 5699. Reserved.




Series 5000 | Dealer Member Margin Rules                                                                 Rule 5600
                                                               Investment Dealer and Partially Consolidated Rules

RULE 5700 | MARGIN REQUIREMENTS FOR OFFSET STRATEGIES INVOLVING DERIVATIVE PRODUCTS

5701. Introduction
         (1)    Rule 5700 addresses the margin treatment of derivative product positions that comprise reduced-
                risk offset strategies. The margin requirements for these strategies are generally less than if the
                positions are margined separately. Reduced margin in some cases is available for both Dealer
                Member inventory and client account offset strategies and in other cases is available for only
                Dealer Member inventory offset strategies. The derivative products covered in Rule 5700 include
                exchange-traded options whose underlying interests include:
                 -      equities
                 -      indexes
                 -      index participation units
                 -      debt
                 -      currencies
                and over-the-counter options, futures contracts and futures contract options.
         (2)    The order of subjects in Rule 5700 is:
                (i)      general requirements and summary reference tables [sections 5710 through 5715],
                (ii)     exchange-traded options,
                         (a)      unhedged option positions [sections 5720 through 5721],
                         (b)      hedged option positions [section 5725],
                         (c)      option spreads and combinations [sections 5730 through 5740],
                         (d)      security and option combinations and conversions [sections 5750 through 5755],
                         (e)      futures and options combinations and conversions [sections 5760 through 5765],
                         (f)      basket, participation unit and futures combinations [sections 5770 through 5772],
                                  and
                         (g)      cross index offsets and the optional use of the Standard Portfolio Analysis
                                  methodology [sections 5775 and 5776],
                (iii)    over-the-counter options [section 5780], and
                (iv)     futures contracts and futures contract options [section 5790].
5702. - 5709. Reserved.

GENERAL REQUIREMENTS AND SUMMARY REFERENCE TABLES
5710. Agreement and account requirements
         (1)    A Dealer Member writing exchange-traded options on behalf of a client must:
                (i)      do so in a margin account and must have and maintain a written margin account
                         agreement, or
                (ii)     for registered accounts that may engage in certain trades involving exchange-traded
                         options, have and maintain a written account agreement defining the rights and obligations
                         between them relating to transacting in exchange-traded options.


Series 5000 | Dealer Member Margin Rules                                                                        Rule 5700
                                                            Investment Dealer and Partially Consolidated Rules

         (2)    A Dealer Member writing over-the-counter options on behalf of a client must do so in a margin
                account.
         (3)    A Dealer Member writing and issuing or guaranteeing over-the-counter options on behalf of a
                client must either:
                (i)     have and maintain with that client a separate written margin agreement defining the rights
                        and obligations between them relating to transacting in over-the-counter options, or
                (ii)    have and maintain with that client a supplementary over-the-counter options agreement
                        defining the rights and obligations between them relating to transacting in over-the-
                        counter options.
5711. Requirement to calculate and obtain margin from clients
         (1)    A Dealer Member must calculate and obtain minimum client margin from clients with option
                positions according to the following:
                (i)     all open written transactions and resulting short positions must be carried in a margin
                        account,
                (ii)    each option must be margined separately and:
                        (a)     for equity, index participation unit, debt or currency options, any difference between
                                the market price of the underlying interest, or
                        (b)     for index options, any difference between the current value of the index,
                        and the exercise price of the option has value only in providing the amount of margin
                        required on that particular option.
5712. Requirements for option offset strategies
         (1)    For all client account option offset strategies involving both short option and long option
                positions, the short option position must expire on or before the date of expiry of the long option
                position.
         (2)    For Dealer Member account option offset strategies involving index option and index participation
                unit option combinations included in subsection 5730(1), the short option position must expire on
                or before the date of expiry of the long option position.
5713. Imposition of special margin requirements
         (1)    The Corporation may impose special margin requirements on particular options or options
                positions.
5714. Treatment of option positions issued by different recognized option clearing corporations
         (1)    If a Dealer Member account or a client account holds options issued by different recognized
                option clearing corporations, with the same underlying interest, they may be treated as being
                equivalent when calculating margin for the account.
5715. Summary reference tables of common strategies
         (1)    The following reference list summarizes the margin requirements for unhedged positions in
                exchange-traded options:
                (i)     long call option - 5720,


Series 5000 | Dealer Member Margin Rules                                                                       Rule 5700
                                                             Investment Dealer and Partially Consolidated Rules

                (ii)    long put option - 5720,
                (iii)   short call option - 5721, and
                (iv)    short put option - 5721.
         (2)    The following reference table summarizes the most common reduced margin offset strategies
                available involving exchange-traded options:

                                           Short             Short call        Long put option Short call
                                           underlying        option                            option and long
                                           interest                                            put option
                 Long underlying offset available            long underlying long underlying      conversion or
                 interest        for long and                interest / short interest / long     long tripo
                                 short positions             call combination put option          - 5754(1)(i)
                                 in same security            - 5750(1)(i)     contract
                                                                              combination
                                                                               - 5751(1)(i)
                 Long call option short underlying call option                 long call option   long call option
                                  interest / long  spread                      / long put         / short call
                                  call option      - 5730(1)(i)                option spread      option / long
                                  contract                                     - 5732(1)(i)       put option
                                  combination                                                     combination
                                           - 5752(1)(i)                                           - 5733(1)(i)
                 Short put                 short underlying short call option put option
                 option                    interest / short / short put       spread
                                           put combination option spread      - 5730(1)(i)
                                           - 5753(1)(i)     - 5731(1)(i)
                 Long call option reconversion or
                 and short put    short tripo
                 option           - 5755(1)(i)
         (3)    Other reduced margin offset strategies available involving exchange-traded options are as
                follows:
                (i)     option positions hedged by escrow receipts or letters of guarantee - 5725,
                (ii)    long warrant - short call offset - 5734,
                (iii)   box spread - 5735, and
                (iv)    butterfly, iron butterfly and iron condor spreads – 5736 through 5740.




Series 5000 | Dealer Member Margin Rules                                                                     Rule 5700
                                                             Investment Dealer and Partially Consolidated Rules

         (4)    The following reference table summarizes additional reduced margin offset strategies available
                involving qualifying baskets of index securities, index participation units, index options and index
                participation unit options:
                                      Short           Short index        Short index      Long index or Short and
                                      qualifying      participation      or index         index         long
                                      basket of       units              participation    participation respectivel
                                      index                              unit call        unit put      y index or
                                      securities                         options          options       index
                                                                                                        participati
                                                                                                        on unit call
                                                                                                        and put
                                                                                                        options
                 Long                 offset          long basket -      long basket -    long basket -    long tripo
                 qualifying           available for   short index        short call       long put         or
                 basket of            long and        participation      combination      combination      conversion
                 index                short           units
                 securities           positions in                       - 5750(1)(ii)    - 5751(1)(ii)    - 5754(1)(ii)
                                      same index      - 5770(1)(i)         and              and              and
                                      product                              5750(1)(iii)     5751(1)(iii)     5754(1)(iii
                                                                                                             )
                 Long index short basket -            offset             long index       long index       long tripo
                 participation long index             available for      participation    participation    or
                 units         participation          long and           units - short    units - long     conversion
                               units                  short              call             put
                                                      positions in       combination      combination      -
                                      - 5771(1)(i)    same index         - 5750(1)(iv)    - 5751(1)(iv)              575
                                                      product              and              and                4(1)(iv)
                                                                           5750(1)(v)       5751(1)(v)         and
                                                                                                               5754(1)(v)
                 Long index short basket -            short index
                 or index      long call              participation
                                                                         Refer to table in subsection
                 participation combination            unit - long call
                                                                                   5715(2)
                 unit call                            combination
                 options



Series 5000 | Dealer Member Margin Rules                                                                          Rule 5700
                                                             Investment Dealer and Partially Consolidated Rules


                                      Short            Short index     Short index     Long index or Short and
                                      qualifying       participation   or index        index         long
                                      basket of        units           participation   participation respectivel
                                      index                            unit call       unit put      y index or
                                      securities                       options         options       index
                                                                                                     participati
                                                                                                     on unit call
                                                                                                     and put
                                                                                                     options
                                      - 5752(1)(ii)    - 5752(1)(iv)
                                        and              and
                                        5752(1)(iii)     5752(1)(v)
                 Short index short basket -            short index
                 or index      short put               participation
                 participation combination             unit - short
                 unit put                              put
                 options       - 5753(1)(ii)           combination
                                       and             - 5753(1)(iv)
                                       5753(1)(iii)      and
                                                         5753(1)(v)
                 Long and      short tripo or short tripo or
                 short         reconversion reconversion
                 respectively
                 index or      - 5755(1)(ii)  - 5755(1)(iv)
                 index           and            and
                 participation 5755(1)(iii)     5755(1)(v)
                 unit call and
                 put options




Series 5000 | Dealer Member Margin Rules                                                                  Rule 5700
                                                               Investment Dealer and Partially Consolidated Rules

         (5)    The following reference table summarizes additional reduced margin offset strategies available
                involving index futures contracts, index options and index participation unit options:
                                           Short index      Short index or     Long index or      Short and long
                                           futures contract index              index              respectively
                                                            participation      participation      index or index
                                                            unit call          unit put options   participation
                                                            options                               unit call and put
                                                                                                  options
                 Long index                same contract      Short calls -    Long puts - long   Futures
                 futures                   month - margin     long index       index futures      conversion or
                 contract                  computed in        futures          contracts          long tripo
                                           respect to the     contracts        - 5761(1)(i) and   - 5764(1)(i) and
                                           net long or net    - 5760(1)(i) and 5761(1)(ii)          5764(1)(ii)
                                           short position       5760(1)(ii)
                                           only
                                           different
                                           contract months
                                           - refer to
                                           requirements
                                           on exchange on
                                           which the
                                           contract trades
                 Long index or             Long calls -
                 index                     short index
                 participation             futures
                 unit call                 contracts
                 options                   - 5762(1)(i) and
                                             5762(1)(ii)         Refer to table in subsection
                 Short index or            Short puts -                    5715(2)
                 index                     short index
                 participation             futures
                 unit put                  contracts
                 options                   - 5763(1)(i) and
                                             5763(1)(ii)



Series 5000 | Dealer Member Margin Rules                                                                    Rule 5700
                                                               Investment Dealer and Partially Consolidated Rules


                                           Short index      Short index or           Long index or      Short and long
                                           futures contract index                    index              respectively
                                                            participation            participation      index or index
                                                            unit call                unit put options   participation
                                                            options                                     unit call and put
                                                                                                        options
                 Long and short            Futures
                 respectively              reconversion or
                 index or index            short tripo
                 participation             - 5765(1)(i) and
                 unit call and               5765(1)(ii)
                 put options
         (6)    The following reference table summarizes additional reduced margin offset strategies available
                involving index futures contracts, qualifying baskets of index securities and index participation
                units:
                                           Short qualifying          Short index                  Short index futures
                                           basket of index           participation units          contracts
                                           securities
                 Long qualifying                                                                  Long qualifying
                 basket of index                                                                  basket of index
                 securities                                                                       securities - Short
                                                                                                  index futures
                                                                                                  contracts
                                                 Refer to table in subsection 5715(4)             - 5772(1)(i)
                 Long index                                                                       Long index
                 participation                                                                    participation units -
                 units                                                                            short index futures
                                                                                                  contracts
                                                                                                  - 5772(1)(ii)
                 Long index                Short qualifying          Short index
                 futures                   basket of index           participation units -
                                                                                                    Refer to table in
                 contracts                 securities - long index   long index futures
                                                                                                   subsection 5715(5)
                                           futures contracts         contracts
                                           - 5772(1)(i)              - 5772(1)(ii)


Series 5000 | Dealer Member Margin Rules                                                                          Rule 5700
                                                               Investment Dealer and Partially Consolidated Rules

         (7)    Other reduced margin offset strategies available involving any combination of qualifying baskets
                of index securities, index participation units, index options, index participation unit options and
                index futures contracts are as follows:
                (i)     long qualifying basket of index securities - short index participation unit call options -
                        commitment to purchase index participation units (Dealer Member only) - 5550,
                (ii)    long qualifying basket of index securities - long index participation unit put options -
                        commitment to purchase index participation units (Dealer Member only) - 5551, and
                (iii)   long qualifying basket of index securities - short index participation units - commitment to
                        purchase index participation units (Dealer Member only) - 5552.
5716. - 5719. Reserved.

EXCHANGE-TRADED OPTIONS - UNHEDGED OPTION POSITIONS
5720. Long option positions
         (1)    Subject to subsection 5720(2), the minimum Dealer Member inventory margin and client account
                margin required for long exchange-traded option positions is the sum of:
                (i)     the lesser of:
                        (a)     a percentage of the market value of the underlying interest determined using the
                                following percentages:
                                (I)     for equity options, the margin rate used for the underlying interest as
                                        determined in section 5311,
                                (II)    for index options or index participation unit options, the published floating
                                        margin rate for the index or index participation unit calculated according to the
                                        formula set out in section 5360,
                                (III)   for debt options, the margin rate used for the underlying interest as
                                        determined in section 5210,
                                (IV)    for currency options, the Corporation’s published spot risk margin rate for the
                                        currency calculated according to the formula set out in subsection 5460(1),
                        and
                        (b)     the option’s in-the-money amount, if any,
                plus
                (ii)    where the period to expiry is greater or equal to nine months, 50% of the option’s time
                        value, 100% of the option’s time value otherwise.
         (2)    If the position in subsection 5720(1) is a long call option on an equity that is the subject of a legal
                and binding cash take-over bid for which all conditions have been met, the margin required on
                that call option is:
                (i)     the market value of the call option,
                minus
                (ii)    the excess, if any, of the amount offered over the exercise value of the call option.




Series 5000 | Dealer Member Margin Rules                                                                           Rule 5700
                                                               Investment Dealer and Partially Consolidated Rules

                If the take-over bid is made for less than 100% of the issued and outstanding securities, the
                margin requirement must be applied pro rata in the same proportion as the offer, and subsection
                5720(1) applies to the balance.
5721. Short option positions
         (1)    Subject to subsection 5721(2), the minimum Dealer Member inventory margin and client account
                margin required for short exchange-traded option positions is:
                (i)     a percentage of the market value of the underlying interest determined using the following
                        percentages:
                        (a)     for equity options, the margin rate used for the underlying interest as determined in
                                section 5311,
                        (b)     for index options or index participation unit options, the published floating margin
                                rate for the index or index participation unit calculated according to the formula set
                                out in section 5360,
                        (c)     for debt options, the margin rate used for the underlying interest as determined in
                                section 5210,
                        (d)     for currency options, the Corporation’s published spot risk margin rate for the
                                currency calculated according to the formula set out in subsection 5460(1),
                minus
                (ii)    any out-of-the-money amount associated with the option.
         (2)    Subsection 5721(1) notwithstanding, the minimum client account margin required for short
                exchange-traded option positions shall be the amount determined by multiplying:
                (i)     in the case of a short call option position, the market value of the underlying interest,
                (ii)    in the case of a short put option position, the aggregate exercise value of the option,
                by
                (iii)   one of the following percentages:
                        (a)     for equity options, 5.00%,
                        (b)     for index options or index participation unit options, 2.00%,
                        (c)     for debt options, 1.00%,
                        (d)     for currency options, 0.75%.
5722. - 5724. Reserved.

EXCHANGE-TRADED OPTIONS - HEDGED OPTION POSITIONS
5725. Hedged option positions
         (1)    No margin is required for the following exchange-traded option and collateral position
                combinations held in equivalent quantities in a Dealer Member inventory or client account:
                           Exchange-traded option position                       Acceptable collateral
                 (i)       Short call option with an equity, index,      and     escrow receipt evidencing the deposit
                           index participation unit, debt or currency            of the underlying security
                           underlying interest

Series 5000 | Dealer Member Margin Rules                                                                          Rule 5700
                                                             Investment Dealer and Partially Consolidated Rules

                           Exchange-traded option position                       Acceptable collateral
                 (ii)      Short put option with an equity, index,       and     escrow receipt evidencing the deposit
                           index participation unit, debt or currency            of government securities
                           underlying interest
                 (iii)     Short put option with an equity, index,       and     letter of guarantee
                           index participation unit, debt or currency
                           underlying interest
                provided the conditions in subsections 5725(2) and 5725(3) are met.
         (2)    For an escrow receipt to be acceptable collateral in subsection 5725(1):
                 (i)     the issuer of the escrow receipt must be a financial institution approved by the recognized
                         option clearing corporation,
                 and
                 (ii)    all recognized option clearing corporation agreements must be signed and delivered to the
                         recognized option clearing corporation and available for inspection by the Corporation on
                         request,
                 and
                 (iii)   in the case of an escrow receipt evidencing the deposit of government securities, the
                         securities must:
                         (a)     be acceptable forms of recognized option clearing corporation margin,
                         (b)     mature within one year of their deposit, and
                         (c)     have a market value of greater than 110% of the aggregate exercise value of the
                                 short put option.
          (3)    For a letter of guarantee to be acceptable collateral in subsection 5725(1):
                 (i)     the issuer must be:
                         (a)     a financial institution approved by the recognized option clearing corporation to
                                 issue escrow receipts,
                         and
                         (b)     a chartered bank, a Québec savings bank or a trust company licensed to do business
                                 in Canada, with a minimum paid-up capital and surplus of $5,000,000,
                         and
                 (ii)    the letter must certify that the bank or trust company:
                         (a)     holds on deposit for the client’s account cash equal to the full aggregate exercise
                                 value of the put option and that amount will be paid to the recognized option
                                 clearing corporation against delivery of the underlying interest hedged by the put
                                 option,
                         or
                         (b)     unconditionally and irrevocably guarantees to pay the recognized option clearing
                                 corporation the full amount of the aggregate exercise value of the put option against
                                 delivery of the underlying interest hedged by the put option,
                         and

Series 5000 | Dealer Member Margin Rules                                                                        Rule 5700
                                                             Investment Dealer and Partially Consolidated Rules

                 (iii)   the Dealer Member must deliver it to the recognized option clearing corporation and the
                         recognized option clearing corporation must accept it as margin.
5726. - 5729. Reserved.
5730. Call option spreads and put option spreads
         (1)    Where a Dealer Member inventory or client account contains one of the following exchange-
                traded option spread pairings:
                           Long (short) option position                          Short (long) option position
                 (i)       call option with an equity, index,          and       call option with the same
                           index participation unit, debt or                     underlying interest
                           currency underlying interest
                 (ii)      put option with an equity, index,           and       put option with the same
                           index participation unit, debt or                     underlying interest
                           currency underlying interest
                 (iii)     index call option                           and       index participation unit call option
                                                                                 based on the same index
                 (iv)      index put option                            and       index participation unit put option
                                                                                 based on the same index
                and equivalent quantities of each position in the pairing are held, the minimum margin required
                for the spread pairing is calculated in accordance with subsection 5730(2).
         (2)    Provided the condition in subsection 5730(1) is met, the minimum margin required is the
                lesser of:
                (i)      the margin required on the short option position determined pursuant to section 5721,
                or
                (ii)     the greater of:
                         (a)    the spread loss amount, if any, that would result if both options were exercised,
                         and
                         (b)    where the spread involves an index option position and an index participation unit
                                option position, the published tracking error margin rate for the spread between the
                                index and the related index participation units, multiplied by the market value of the
                                index participation units underlying the index participation unit option position.
5731. Short call option - short put option spread
         (1)    Where a Dealer Member inventory or client account contains one of the following exchange-
                traded option spread pairings:
                           Short option position                                   Short option position
                 (i)       call option with an equity, index, index    and         put option with the same
                           participation unit, debt or currency                    underlying interest
                           underlying interest



Series 5000 | Dealer Member Margin Rules                                                                        Rule 5700
                                                                Investment Dealer and Partially Consolidated Rules

                 (ii)         index call option                         and           index participation unit put option
                                                                                      based on the same index
                 (iii)        index participation unit call option      and           index put option based on the
                                                                                      same index
                and equivalent quantities of each position in the pairing are held, the minimum margin required
                for the spread pairing is calculated in accordance with subsection 5731(2).
         (2)    The minimum margin required is the greatest of:
                (i)      the greater of:
                         (a)     the margin required on the call option position,
                         or
                         (b)     the margin required on the put option position,
                and
                (ii)     the excess of the aggregate exercise value of the put option position over the aggregate
                         exercise value of the call option position,
                and
                (iii)    where the spread involves an index option position and an index participation unit option
                         position, the published tracking error margin rate for the spread between the index and the
                         related index participation units, multiplied by the market value of the index participation
                         units underlying the index participation unit option position.
5732. Long call option - long put option spread
         (1)    Where a Dealer Member inventory or client account contains one of the following exchange-
                traded option spread pairings:
                              Long option position                                  Long option position
                 (i)          call option with an equity, index,         and        put option with the same underlying
                              index participation unit, debt or                     interest
                              currency underlying interest
                 (ii)         index call option                          and        index participation unit put option
                                                                                    based on the same index
                 (iii)        index participation unit call option       and        index put option based on the same
                                                                                    index
                and equivalent quantities of each position in the pairing are held, the minimum margin required
                for the spread pairing is calculated in accordance with subsection 5732(2).
         (2)    The minimum margin required is the lesser of:
                (i)      the sum of:
                         (a)     the margin required for the long call option position,
                         plus
                         (b)     the margin required for the long put option position,
                or


Series 5000 | Dealer Member Margin Rules                                                                          Rule 5700
                                                                  Investment Dealer and Partially Consolidated Rules

                (ii)    the sum of:
                               (a)       100% of the market value of the long call option,
                        plus
                        (b)      100% of the market value of the long put option,
                        minus
                        (c)      the amount by which the aggregate exercise value of the put option exceeds the
                                 aggregate exercise value of the call option.
5733. Long call option - short call option - long put option
         (1)    Where a Dealer Member inventory or client account contains long call option, short call option
                and long put option positions in exchange-traded options on the same underlying interest and
                equivalent quantities of each position in the combination are held, the minimum margin required
                is:
                (i)     100% of the market value of the long call option,
                plus
                (ii)    100% of the market value of the long put option,
                minus
                (iii)   100% of the market value of the short call option,
                plus
                (iv)    the greater of:
                        (a)      any excess of the aggregate exercise value of the long call option over the aggregate
                                 exercise value of the short call option, and
                        (b)      any excess of the aggregate exercise value of the long call option over the aggregate
                                 exercise value of the long put option.
                 Where the amount calculated in clause 5733(1)(iv) is negative, this amount may be applied
                 against the margin charge.
5734. Long warrant - short call option
         (1)    Where a Dealer Member inventory or client account contains long warrant and short call
                exchange-traded option positions on the same underlying interest and equivalent quantities of
                each position in the pairing are held, the minimum margin required is the sum of:
                (i)     the lesser of:
                        (a)      a percentage of the market value of the underlying interest determined using the
                                 following percentages:
                                 (I)       for equity options, the margin rate used for the underlying interest as
                                           determined in section 5311,
                                 (II)      for index options or index participation unit options, the published floating
                                           margin rate for the index or index participation unit calculated according to the
                                           formula set out in section 5360,
                                 (III)     for debt options, the margin rate used for the underlying interest as
                                           determined in section 5210,


Series 5000 | Dealer Member Margin Rules                                                                             Rule 5700
                                                             Investment Dealer and Partially Consolidated Rules

                                (IV)   for currency options, the Corporation’s published spot risk margin rate for the
                                       currency calculated according to the formula set out in subsection 5460(1),
                        or
                        (b)     the spread loss amount, if any, that would result if both the option and the warrant
                                were exercised,
                and
                (ii)    the excess of the market value of the warrant over the in-the-money value of the warrant
                        multiplied by 25%,
                and
                (iii)   the in-the-money value of the warrant, multiplied by:
                        (a)     50%, where the expiration date of the warrant is 9 months or more away, or
                        (b)     100%, where the expiration date of the warrant is fewer than 9 months away.
5735. Box spread
         (1)    Client account requirement - Where a client account contains a box spread combination on the
                same underlying interest with all exchange-traded options expiring at the same time, such that
                the client holds a long and short call option and a long and short put option and where the long
                call option and short put option, and short call option and long put option have the same exercise
                price, the minimum client account margin required is the lesser of:
                (i)     the greater of the margin requirements calculated for the component call and put spreads
                        pursuant to subsection 5730(2), and
                (ii)    the greater of the out-of-the-money amounts calculated for the component call and put
                        spreads.
         (2)    Dealer Member inventory account requirement - Where a Dealer Member inventory account
                contains a box spread exchange-traded option combination on the same underlying interest with
                all options expiring at the same time, such that the Dealer Member holds a long and short call
                option and a long and short put option and where the long call option and short put option, and
                short call option and long put option have the same exercise price, the minimum Dealer Member
                inventory margin required is the sum of:
                (i)     the difference, plus or minus, between the aggregate exercise value of the long call options
                        and the aggregate exercise value of the long put options, and
                (ii)    the net market value of the options.
5736. Long butterfly spread
         (1)    Where a Dealer Member inventory or client account contains a long butterfly spread combination
                on the same underlying interest with all exchange-traded options expiring at the same time, such
                that short positions in two call options (or put options) are held and the short call options (or
                short put options) are at a middle exercise price and are flanked on either side by a long call
                option (or long put option) having a lower and higher exercise price respectively, and the interval
                between the exercise prices is equal, the minimum margin required is the net market value of the
                short and long call options (or put options).



Series 5000 | Dealer Member Margin Rules                                                                        Rule 5700
                                                          Investment Dealer and Partially Consolidated Rules

5737. Short butterfly spread
         (1)    Where a Dealer Member inventory or client account contains a short butterfly spread
                combination on the same underlying interest with all exchange-traded options expiring at the
                same time, such that long positions in two call options (or put options) are held and the long call
                options (or long put options) are at a middle exercise price and are flanked on either side by a
                short call option (or short put option) having a lower and higher exercise price respectively, and
                the interval between the exercise prices is equal, the minimum margin required is the amount, if
                any, by which the exercise value of the long call options (or long put options) exceeds the exercise
                value of the short call options (or short put options).
5738. Long condor spread
         (1)    Where a Dealer Member inventory or client account contains a long condor spread combination
                on the same underlying interest with all exchange-traded options expiring at the same time, such
                that four separate options series are held wherein the exercise prices of the options are in
                ascending order and the interval between the exercise prices is equal, comprising a short position
                in two call options (or put options) and the short call options (or short put options) are flanked on
                either side by a long call option (or long put option) having a lower and higher exercise price
                respectively, the minimum margin required is the net market value of the short and long call
                options (or put options).
5739. Short iron butterfly spread
         (1)    Where a Dealer Member inventory or client account contains a short iron butterfly spread
                combination on the same underlying interest with all exchange-traded options expiring at the
                same time, such that four separate options series are held wherein the exercise prices of the
                options are in ascending order, and the interval between the exercise prices is equal, comprising
                short positions in a call option and a put option with the same exercise price and the short options
                are flanked on either side by a long put option and a long call option having a lower and higher
                exercise price respectively, the minimum margin required shall equal the exercise price interval
                multiplied by the unit of trading.
5740. Short iron condor spread
         (1)    Where a client account contains a short iron condor spread combination on the same underlying
                interest with all exchange-traded options expiring at the same time, such that a client holds four
                separate options series wherein the exercise prices of the options are in ascending order, and the
                interval between the exercise prices is equal, comprising short positions in a call option and a put
                option and the short options are flanked on either side by a long put option and a long call option
                having a lower and higher exercise price respectively, the minimum margin required shall equal
                the exercise price interval multiplied by the unit of trading.




Series 5000 | Dealer Member Margin Rules                                                                     Rule 5700
                                                              Investment Dealer and Partially Consolidated Rules

5741. - 5749. Reserved.

EXCHANGE-TRADED OPTIONS - SECURITY AND OPTION COMBINATIONS AND CONVERSIONS
5750. Long underlying interest or convertible security - short call option combination
         (1)    Where a Dealer Member inventory or client account contains one of the following exchange-
                traded option and security combinations:
                           Long position                                        Short option position
                 (i)       underlying interest or currently           and       call option with the same underlying
                           convertible security                                 interest
                 (ii)      qualifying basket of index securities      and       index call option based on the same
                                                                                index
                 (iii)     qualifying basket of index securities      and       index participation unit call option
                                                                                based on the same index
                 (iv)      index participation unit                   and       index participation unit call option
                                                                                based on the same index
                 (v)       index participation unit                   and       index call option based on the same
                                                                                index
                and equivalent quantities of each position in the combination are held, the minimum margin
                required for the combination is calculated in accordance with subsection 5750(2).
         (2)    Subject to additional margin requirements set out in subsections 5750(3) through 5750(5), the
                minimum margin required is the lesser of:
                (i)      the normal margin required on the underlying interest, index basket or index participation
                         unit position,
                and
                (ii)     any excess of the aggregate exercise value of the call options over the normal loan value of
                         the underlying interest, index basket or index participation unit position.
         (3)    Where the combination involves a currently convertible security position, additional margin is
                required to be provided in the amount of the conversion loss.
         (4)    Where the combination involves a qualifying basket of index securities and the basket is
                imperfect, additional margin is required to be provided in the amount of the calculated
                incremental basket margin rate for the basket multiplied by the market value of the basket.
         (5)    Where the combination involves either:
                (i)      a qualifying basket of index securities and an index participation unit option position,
                or
                (ii)     an index participation unit position and an index option position,
                additional margin is required to be provided in the amount of the published tracking error margin
                rate for the spread between the index and the related index participation units, multiplied by the
                market value of the index participation units underlying the index participation unit option
                position or index participation unit position held.

Series 5000 | Dealer Member Margin Rules                                                                         Rule 5700
                                                               Investment Dealer and Partially Consolidated Rules

5751. Long underlying interest - long put option combination
         (1)    Where a Dealer Member inventory or client account contains one of the following exchange-
                traded option and security combinations:
                              Long position                                     Long option position
                 (i)          underlying interest                      and      put option with the same underlying
                                                                                interest
                 (ii)         qualifying basket of index securities    and      index put option based on the same
                                                                                index
                 (iii)        qualifying basket of index securities    and      index participation unit put option
                                                                                based on the same index
                 (iv)         index participation unit                 and      index participation unit put option
                                                                                based on the same index
                 (v)          index participation unit                 and      index put option based on the same
                                                                                index
                and equivalent quantities of each position in the combination are held, the minimum margin
                required for the combination is calculated in accordance with subsection 5751(2).
         (2)    Subject to additional margin requirements set out in subsection 5751(3), the minimum margin
                required is the greater of:
                (i)      lesser of:
                         (a)     the normal margin required on the underlying interest,
                         or
                         (b)     the excess of the combined market value of the underlying interest and the put
                                 option over the aggregate exercise value of the put option,
                (ii)     where the combination involves:
                         (a)     a qualifying basket of index securities and an index participation unit option position,
                         or
                         (b)     an index participation unit position and an index option position,
                         the published tracking error margin rate for the spread between the index and the related
                         index participation units, multiplied by the market value of the index participation units
                         underlying the index participation unit option position or index participation unit position
                         held.
         (3)    Where the combination involves a qualifying basket of index securities and the basket is
                imperfect, additional margin is required to be provided in the amount of the calculated
                incremental basket margin rate for the basket multiplied by the market value of the basket.
5752. Short underlying interest - long call option combination
         (1)    Where a Dealer Member inventory or client account contains one of the following exchange-
                traded option and security combinations:
                              Short position                                    Long option position


Series 5000 | Dealer Member Margin Rules                                                                          Rule 5700
                                                               Investment Dealer and Partially Consolidated Rules

                 (i)       underlying interest                         and      call option with the same underlying
                                                                                interest
                 (ii)      qualifying basket of index securities       and      index call option based on the same
                                                                                index
                 (iii)     qualifying basket of index securities       and      index participation unit call option
                                                                                based on the same index
                 (iv)      index participation unit                    and      index participation unit call option
                                                                                based on the same index
                 (v)       index participation unit                    and      index call option based on the same
                                                                                index
                and equivalent quantities of each position in the combination are held, the minimum margin
                required for the combination is calculated in accordance with subsection 5752(2).
         (2)    Subject to additional margin requirements set out in subsection 5752(3), the minimum margin
                required is the sum of:
                (i)      100% of the market value of the long call option,
                plus
                (ii)     the greater of:
                         (a)    the lesser of:
                               (I)    any out-of-the-money value associated with the call option,
                               or
                               (II)   the normal margin required on the underlying interest,
                         (b)    where the combination involves:
                               (I)     a qualifying basket of index securities and an index participation unit option
                                       position,
                               or
                               (II)    an index participation unit position and an index option position,
                               the published tracking error margin rate for the spread between the index and the
                               related index participation units, multiplied by the market value of the index
                               participation units underlying the index participation unit option position or index
                               participation unit position held,
                minus
                (iii)    where the call option is in-the-money, the in-the-money value, provided the overall margin
                         requirement cannot be reduced to less than zero.
         (3)    Where the combination involves a qualifying basket of index securities and the basket is
                imperfect, additional margin is required to be provided in the amount of the calculated
                incremental basket margin rate multiplied by the market value of the basket.
5753. Short underlying interest - short put option combination
         (1)    Where a Dealer Member inventory or client account contains one of the following exchange-
                traded option and security combinations:

Series 5000 | Dealer Member Margin Rules                                                                          Rule 5700
                                                                 Investment Dealer and Partially Consolidated Rules

                                Short position                                 Short option position
                  (i)           underlying interest                     and    put option with the same underlying
                                                                               interest
                  (ii)          qualifying basket of index securities   and    index put option based on the same index
                  (iii)         qualifying basket of index securities   and    index participation unit put option based
                                                                               on the same index
                  (iv)          index participation unit                and    index participation unit put option based
                                                                               on the same index
                  (v)           index participation unit                and    index put option based on the same index
                 and equivalent quantities of each position in the combination are held, the minimum margin
                 required for the combination is calculated in accordance with subsection 5753(2).
           (2)     Subject to additional margin requirements set out in subsection 5753(3), the minimum margin
                   required is the greater of:
                 (i)      the lesser of:
                          (a)      the normal margin required on the underlying interest, index basket or index
                                   participation unit position, and
                          (b)      any excess of the normal margin required on the underlying interest, index basket or
                                   index participation unit position over the in-the-money value, if any, of the put
                                   options,
                 (ii)     where the combination involves:
                          (a)      a qualifying basket of index securities and an index participation unit option position,
                          or
                          (b)      an index participation unit position and an index option position,
                          the published tracking error margin rate for the spread between the index and the related
                          index participation units, multiplied by the market value of the index participation units
                          underlying the index participation unit option position or index participation unit position
                          held.
         (3)     Where the combination involves a qualifying basket of index securities and the basket is
                 imperfect, additional margin is required to be provided in the amount of the calculated
                 incremental basket margin rate for the basket multiplied by the market value of the basket.
5754. Conversion or long tripo combination
         (1)     Where a Dealer Member inventory or client account contains one of the following exchange-
                 traded option and security combinations:
                                                                                                     Short option
                               Long position                     Long option position                position
                  (i)          underlying interest         and   put option with the same     and    call option with the
                                                                 underlying interest                 same underlying
                                                                                                     interest


Series 5000 | Dealer Member Margin Rules                                                                            Rule 5700
                                                               Investment Dealer and Partially Consolidated Rules

                 (ii)          qualifying basket       and      index put option based       and    index call option
                               of index securities              on the same index                   based on the same
                                                                                                    index
                 (iii)         qualifying basket       and      index participation unit     and    index participation
                               of index securities              put option based on the             unit call option based
                                                                same index                          on the same index
                 (iv)          index participation     and      index participation unit     and    index participation
                               unit                             put option based on the             unit call option based
                                                                same index                          on the same index
                 (v)           index participation     and      index put option based       and    index call option
                               unit                             on the same index                   based on the same
                                                                                                    index
                and equivalent quantities of each position in the combination are held, the minimum margin
                required for the combination is calculated in accordance with subsection 5754(2).
         (2)    Subject to additional margin requirements set out in subsection 5754(3), the minimum margin
                required is the greater of:
                (i)      the sum of:
                         (a)      100% of the market value of the long put options,
                         minus
                         (b)      100% of the market value of the short call options,
                         plus
                         (c)      the difference, plus or minus, between the market value of the underlying interest,
                                  index basket or index participation unit position and the aggregate exercise value of
                                  the long put options or short call options, whichever is lower,
                and
                (ii)     where the combination involves:
                         (a)      a qualifying basket of index securities and an index participation unit option position,
                         or
                         (b)      an index participation unit position and an index option position,
                         the published tracking error margin rate for the spread between the index and the related
                         index participation units, multiplied by the market value of the index participation units
                         underlying the index participation unit option position or index participation unit position
                         held.
         (3)    Where the combination involves a qualifying basket of index securities and the basket is
                imperfect, additional margin is required to be provided in the amount of the calculated
                incremental basket margin rate for the basket multiplied by the market value of the basket.
5755. Reconversion or short tripo combination
         (1)    Where a Dealer Member inventory or client account contains one of the following exchange-
                traded option and security combinations:


Series 5000 | Dealer Member Margin Rules                                                                           Rule 5700
                                                              Investment Dealer and Partially Consolidated Rules

                              Short position                 Long option position                Short option position
                 (i)          underlying interest    and     call option with the     and        put option with the
                                                             same underlying interest            same underlying
                                                                                                 interest
                 (ii)         qualifying basket of   and     index call option based     and     index put option based
                              index securities               on the same index                   on the same index
                 (iii)        qualifying basket of   and     index participation unit    and     index participation unit
                              index securities               call option based on the            put option based on the
                                                             same index                          same index
                 (iv)         index participation    and     index participation unit    and     index participation unit
                              unit                           call option based on the            put option based on the
                                                             same index                          same index
                 (v)          index participation    and     index call option based     and     index put option based
                              unit                           on the same index                   on the same index
                and equivalent quantities of each position in the combination are held, the minimum margin
                required for the combination is calculated in accordance with subsection 5755(2).
         (2)    Subject to additional margin requirements set out in subsection 5755(3), the minimum margin
                required is the greater of:
                (i)      the sum of:
                         (a)     100% of the market value of the long call options,
                         minus
                         (b)     100% of the market value of the short put options,
                         plus
                         (c)     the difference, plus or minus, between the aggregate exercise value of the long call
                                 options or short put options, whichever is higher and the market value of the
                                 underlying interest, index basket or index participation unit position,
                and
                (ii)     where the combination involves:
                         (a)     a qualifying basket of index securities and an index participation unit option position,
                         or
                         (b)     an index participation unit position and an index option position,
                         the published tracking error margin rate for the spread between the index and the related
                         index participation units, multiplied by the market value of the index participation units
                         underlying the index participation unit option position or index participation unit position
                         held.
         (3)    Where the combination involves a qualifying basket of index securities and the basket is
                imperfect, additional margin is required to be provided in the amount of the calculated
                incremental basket margin rate for the basket multiplied by the market value of the basket.



Series 5000 | Dealer Member Margin Rules                                                                          Rule 5700
                                                            Investment Dealer and Partially Consolidated Rules

5756. - 5759. Reserved.

EXCHANGE-TRADED OPTIONS - FUTURES AND OPTIONS COMBINATIONS AND CONVERSIONS
5760. Long index futures contract - short call option combination
         (1)    Where a Dealer Member inventory or client account contains one of the following exchange
                traded futures contract and exchange-traded option contract combinations:
                           Long futures position                               Short option position
                 (i)       index futures contracts             and             index call option based on the same
                                                                               index
                 (ii)      index futures contracts             and             index participation unit call option
                                                                               based on the same index
                and equivalent quantities of each position in the combination are held and the options and
                futures contracts have the same settlement date or can be settled in either of the two nearest
                contract months, the minimum margin required for the combination is calculated in accordance
                with subsection 5760(2).
         (2)    The minimum margin required is the greater of:
                (i)      (a)    the normal margin required on the index futures contract position,
                        minus
                        (b)     the aggregate market value of the short call options,
                and
                (ii)    the published tracking error margin rate for the spread between the index futures contracts
                        and the related index or the index futures contracts and the related index participation
                        units, multiplied by the market value of the qualifying basket of index securities underlying
                        the index option position or the index participation units underlying the index participation
                        unit option position.
         (3)    For a client account offset as set out in subsection 5760(1), the index futures contracts must be
                excluded from the domestic gross customer margin model.
5761. Long futures contracts - long put option combination
         (1)    Where a Dealer Member inventory or client account contains one of the following exchange
                traded futures contract and exchange-traded option contract combinations:
                           Long futures position                               Long option position
                 (i)       index futures contracts              and            index put option based on the same
                                                                               index
                 (ii)      index futures contracts              and            index participation unit put option
                                                                               based on the same index
                and equivalent quantities of each position in the combination are held and the options and
                futures contracts have the same settlement date or can be settled in either of the two nearest
                contract months, the minimum margin required for the combination is calculated in accordance
                with subsections 5761(2) and 5761(3).

Series 5000 | Dealer Member Margin Rules                                                                       Rule 5700
                                                               Investment Dealer and Partially Consolidated Rules

         (2)    Where the put option position is out-of-the-money, the minimum margin required is the greater
                of:
                (i)     the sum of:
                        (a)     the aggregate market value of the long put options
                        plus
                        (b)     the lesser of:
                                (I)    (A)   the daily settlement value of the index futures contract position,
                                       minus
                                       (B)     the aggregate exercise value of the long put options,
                                (II)   the margin required on the long futures contract position,
                and
                (ii)    the published tracking error margin rate for the spread between the index futures contracts
                        and the related index or the index futures contracts and the related index participation
                        units, multiplied by the market value of the qualifying basket of index securities underlying
                        the index option position or the index participation units underlying the index participation
                        unit option position.
         (3)    Where the put option position is in-the-money or at-the-money, the minimum margin required is
                the greater of:
                (i)     any excess of the aggregate market value of the long put options over the aggregate in-
                        the-money amount of the long put options,
                and
                (ii)    the published tracking error margin rate for the spread between the index futures contracts
                        and the related index or the index futures contracts and the related index participation
                        units, multiplied by the market value of the underlying qualifying basket of index securities
                        or the index participation units.
         (4)    For a client account offset as set out in subsection 5761(1), the index futures contracts must be
                excluded from the domestic gross customer margin model.
5762. Short futures contracts - long call option combination
         (1)    Where a Dealer Member inventory or client account contains one of the following exchange
                traded futures contract and exchange-traded option contract combinations:
                           Short futures position                               Long option position
                 (i)       index futures contracts                 and          index call option based on the same
                                                                                index
                 (ii)      index futures contracts                 and          index participation unit call option
                                                                                based on the same index
                and equivalent quantities of each position in the combination are held and the options and
                futures contracts have the same settlement date or can be settled in either of the two nearest
                contract months, the minimum margin required for the combination is calculated in accordance
                with subsections 5762(2) and 5762(3).


Series 5000 | Dealer Member Margin Rules                                                                          Rule 5700
                                                               Investment Dealer and Partially Consolidated Rules

         (2)    Where the call option position is out-of-the-money, the minimum margin required is the greater
                of:
                (i)     the sum of:
                        (a)     the aggregate market value of the long call options
                        plus
                        (b)     the lesser of:
                                (I)    (A)   the aggregate exercise value of the long call options,
                                       minus
                                       (B)     the daily settlement value of the index futures contract position,
                                (II)   the margin required on the short futures contract position,
                and
                (ii)    the published tracking error margin rate for the spread between the index future contracts
                        and the related index or the index future contracts and the related index participation units,
                        multiplied by the market value of the qualifying basket of index securities underlying the
                        index option position or the index participation units underlying the index participation unit
                        option position.
         (3)    Where the call option position is in-the-money or at-the-money, the minimum margin required is
                the greater of:
                (i)     any excess of the aggregate market value of the long call options over the aggregate in-
                        the-money amount of the long call options,
                and
                (ii)    the published tracking error margin rate for the spread between the index futures contracts
                        and the related index or the index futures contracts and the related index participation
                        units, multiplied by the market value of the underlying qualifying basket of index securities
                        or the index participation units.
         (4)    For a client account offset as set out in subsection 5762(1), the index futures contracts must be
                excluded from the domestic gross customer margin model.
5763. Short futures contracts - short put option combination
         (1)    Where a Dealer Member inventory or client account contains one of the following exchange
                traded futures contract and exchange-traded option contract combinations:
                           Short futures position                             Short option position
                 (i)       index futures contracts                and         index put option based on the same index
                 (ii)      index futures contracts                and         index participation unit put option based
                                                                              on the same index
                and equivalent quantities of each position in the combination are held and the options and
                futures contracts have the same settlement date or can be settled in either of the two nearest
                contract months, the minimum margin required for the combination is calculated in accordance
                with subsection 5763(2).
         (2)    The minimum margin required is the greater of:

Series 5000 | Dealer Member Margin Rules                                                                            Rule 5700
                                                            Investment Dealer and Partially Consolidated Rules

                (i)     (a)     the normal margin required on the index futures contract position,
                        minus
                        (b)     the aggregate market value of the short put options,
                and
                (ii)    the published tracking error margin rate for the spread between the index futures contracts
                        and the related index or the index futures contracts and the related index participation
                        units, multiplied by the market value of the qualifying basket of index securities underlying
                        the index option position or the index participation units underlying the index participation
                        unit option position.
         (3)    For a client account offset as set out in subsection 5763(1), the index futures contracts must be
                excluded from the domestic gross customer margin model.
5764. Futures conversion or long tripo combination
         (1)    Where a Dealer Member inventory or client account contains one of the following exchange
                traded futures contract and exchange-traded option contract combinations:
                         Long futures position              Long option position              Short option position
                 (i)     index futures contracts and        index put option based and        index call option based
                                                            on the same index                 on the same index
                 (ii)    index futures contracts and        index participation unit and      index participation unit
                                                            put option based on               call option based on
                                                            the same index                    the same index
                and equivalent quantities of each position in the combination are held and the options contracts
                have the same expiry date and the options and futures contracts have the same settlement date
                or can be settled in either of the two nearest contract months, the minimum margin required for
                the combination is calculated in accordance with subsection 5764(2).
         (2)    The minimum margin required is the greater of:
                (i)     the sum of:
                        (a)     the aggregate market value of the long call options,
                        minus
                        (b)     the aggregate market value of the short put options,
                        plus
                        (c)     the difference, plus or minus, between the daily settlement value of the long futures
                                contracts and the aggregate exercise value of the long put options or the short call
                                options, whichever is lower,
                and
                (ii)    the published tracking error margin rate for the spread between the index futures contracts
                        and the related index or the index futures contracts and the related index participation
                        units, multiplied by the market value of the qualifying basket of index securities underlying
                        the index option position or the index participation units underlying the index participation
                        unit option position.


Series 5000 | Dealer Member Margin Rules                                                                      Rule 5700
                                                            Investment Dealer and Partially Consolidated Rules

         (3)    For a client account offset as set out in subsection 5764(1), the index futures contracts must be
                excluded from the domestic gross customer margin model.
5765. Reconversion or short tripo combination
         (1)    Where a Dealer Member inventory or client account contains one of the following exchange
                traded futures contract and exchange-traded option contract combinations:
                         Short futures position             Long option position              Short option position
                 (i)     index futures contracts and        index call option based and       index put option based
                                                            on the same index                 on the same index
                 (ii)    index futures contracts and        index participation unit and      index participation unit
                                                            call option based on              put option based on
                                                            the same index                    the same index
                and equivalent quantities of each position in the combination are held and the options contracts
                have the same expiry date and the options and futures contracts have the same settlement date
                or can be settled in either of the two nearest contract months, the minimum margin required for
                the combination is calculated in accordance with subsection 5765(2).
         (2)    The minimum margin required is the greater of:
                (i)     the sum of:
                        (a)     100% of the market value of the long call options,
                        minus
                        (b)     100% of the market value of the short put options,
                        plus
                        (c)     the difference, plus or minus, between the aggregate exercise value of the long call
                                options or short put options, whichever is higher, and the daily settlement value of
                                the short futures contracts,
                and
                (ii)    the published tracking error margin rate for the spread between the index futures contracts
                        and the related index or the index futures contracts and the related index participation
                        units, multiplied by the market value of the qualifying basket of index securities underlying
                        the index option position or the index participation units underlying the index participation
                        unit option position.
         (3)    For a client account offset as set out in subsection 5765(1), the index futures contracts must be
                excluded from the domestic gross customer margin model.
5766. - 5769. Reserved.

EXCHANGE-TRADED OPTIONS - BASKET, PARTICIPATION UNIT AND FUTURES COMBINATIONS
5770. Long qualifying basket of index securities - short index participation units
         (1)    Where a Dealer Member inventory or client account contains the following combination:




Series 5000 | Dealer Member Margin Rules                                                                       Rule 5700
                                                            Investment Dealer and Partially Consolidated Rules

                           Long position                                      Short position
                 (i)       qualifying basket of index securities     and      index participation units based on
                                                                              the same index
                and equivalent quantities of each position in the combination are held, the minimum margin is
                calculated in accordance with subsection 5770(2).
         (2)    The minimum margin required shall be the sum of:
                (i)     the published tracking error margin rate,
                plus
                (ii)    the calculated incremental basket margin rate for the qualifying basket of index securities,
                multiplied by the market value of the index participation units.
5771. Long index participation units - short qualifying basket of index securities
         (1)    Where a Dealer Member inventory or client account contains the following combination:
                           Long position                                      Short position
                 (i)       index participation units                and       qualifying basket of index securities of
                                                                              the same index
                and equivalent quantities of each position in the combination are held, the minimum margin is
                calculated in accordance with subsection 5771(2).
         (2)    The minimum margin required shall be the sum of:
                (i)     the published tracking error margin rate, unless the long index participation units position
                        is of size sufficient to be converted into a basket of index securities or a multiple thereof,
                plus
                (ii)    the calculated incremental basket margin rate for the qualifying basket of index securities,
                        multiplied by the market value of the index participation units.
5772. Index futures contracts - qualifying baskets of index securities or index participation units
         (1)    Where a Dealer Member inventory or client account contains the following combination:
                           Long (short) futures position                      Short (long) position
                 (i)       index futures contracts                  and       qualifying basket of index securities of
                                                                              the same index
                 (ii)      index futures contracts                  and       index participation units based on the
                                                                              same index
                and equivalent quantities of each position in the combination are held, the minimum margin is
                calculated in accordance with subsection 5772(2).
         (2)    Subject to additional margin requirements set out in subsection 5772(3), the minimum margin
                required shall be the published tracking error margin rate for the spread between the index
                futures contracts and the related index or the index futures contracts and the related index
                participation units, multiplied by the market value of the qualifying basket of index securities or
                the index participation units held.


Series 5000 | Dealer Member Margin Rules                                                                        Rule 5700
                                                           Investment Dealer and Partially Consolidated Rules

         (3)    Where the combination involves a qualifying basket of index securities and the basket is
                imperfect, additional margin is required to be provided in the amount of the calculated
                incremental basket margin rate for the basket multiplied by the market value of the basket.
         (4)    For a client account offset as set out in subsection 5772(1), the index futures contracts must be
                excluded from the domestic gross customer margin model.
5773. - 5774. Reserved.

EXCHANGE-TRADED OPTIONS - CROSS INDEX OFFSETS AND THE OPTIONAL USE OF THE STANDARD PORTFOLIO
      ANALYSIS METHODOLOGY
5775. Cross index offset combinations involving index products
         (1)    Offsets involving products based on two different indices are permitted provided:
                (i)     both indices qualify as an index as defined in subsection 5130(10),
                (ii)    there is significant performance correlation between the indices, and
                (iii)   the Corporation has made available a published tracking error margin rate for cross index
                        offsets involving the two indices.
                Where offsets involving products based on two different indices are permitted the margin
                requirements set out in sections 5730 through 5772 may be used provided that any margin
                requirement calculated shall be no less than the published tracking error margin rate for cross
                index offsets involving the two indices.
5776. Optional use of the Standard Portfolio Analysis methodology
          (1)    For a Dealer Member inventory account constituted exclusively of positions in derivatives listed
                 at the Bourse de Montréal, the margin required may be the one calculated by the Standard
                 Portfolio Analysis methodology using the margin interval calculated and the assumptions used
                 by the Canadian Derivatives Clearing Corporation.
          (2)    For client accounts subject to the domestic gross customer margin model constituted exclusively
                 of positions in derivatives listed at the Bourse de Montréal, the margin required may be the one
                 calculated by the Standard Portfolio Analysis methodology using the margin interval calculated
                 and the assumptions used by the Canadian Derivatives Clearing Corporation.
          (3)    If the Dealer Member selects the Standard Portfolio Analysis methodology, the margin
                 requirements calculated under this methodology will supersede the requirements stipulated in
                 these Rules.
          (4)     The Corporation may restrict the application of this section 5776, if it considers continued use of
                  the Standard Portfolio Analysis methodology to be inappropriate for Dealer Member or client
                  margin requirements.




Series 5000 | Dealer Member Margin Rules                                                                      Rule 5700
                                                             Investment Dealer and Partially Consolidated Rules

5777. - 5779. Reserved.

OVER-THE-COUNTER OPTIONS
5780. Long option positions
         (1)    The minimum Dealer Member inventory margin required for long over-the-counter option
                positions is:
                (i)     where the option’s market price is less than $1.00, the market value of the option,
                (ii)    where the option’s market price is $1.00 or more, and:
                        (a)     the option is a call option, the market value of the call option less 50% of any excess
                                of the market value of the underlying interest over the aggregate exercise value of
                                the call option, or
                        (b)     the option is a put option, the market value of the put option less 50% of any excess
                                of the aggregate exercise value of the put option over the market value of the
                                underlying interest.
         (2)    The minimum client account margin required for long over-the-counter option positions is the
                market value of the option.
5781. Short option positions
         (1)    Subject to subsection 5781(2), the minimum Dealer Member inventory margin and client account
                margin required for short over-the-counter option positions is:
                (i)     a percentage of the market value of the underlying interest determined using the following
                        percentages:
                        (a)     for debt options, the margin rate used for the underlying interest as determined in
                                sections 5210 through 5241,
                        (b)     for equity options, the margin rate used for the underlying interest as determined in
                                section 5310 through 5315,
                        (c)     for index options or index participation unit options, the published floating margin
                                rate for the index or index participation unit calculated according to the formula set
                                out in section 5360,
                        (d)     for currency options, the Corporation’s published spot risk margin rate for the
                                currency calculated according to the formula set out in section 5460 through 5469,
                minus
                (ii)    any out-of-the-money amount associated with the option.
         (2)    Subsection 5781(1) notwithstanding, the minimum client account margin required for short over-
                the-counter option positions shall be no less than the amount determined by multiplying:
                (i)     in the case of a short call option position, the market value of the underlying interest,
                (ii)    in the case of a short put option position, the aggregate exercise value of the option,
                by 25% of the margin rate used for the underlying interest.




Series 5000 | Dealer Member Margin Rules                                                                         Rule 5700
                                                            Investment Dealer and Partially Consolidated Rules

5782. Hedged option positions
         (1)    No margin is required for the following over-the-counter option and collateral position
                combinations held in equivalent quantities in a Dealer Member inventory or client account:
                           Over-the-counter option position                 Acceptable collateral
                 (i)       Short call option with an equity, index,   and   escrow receipt evidencing the deposit
                           index participation unit, debt or                of the underlying security
                           currency underlying interest
                 (ii)      Short call option with an equity, index,   and   escrow receipt evidencing the deposit
                           index participation unit, debt or                of government securities
                           currency underlying interest
                provided the conditions in subsection 5782(2) are met.
         (2)    For an escrow receipt to be acceptable collateral in subsection 5782(1) the issuer of the escrow
                receipt must be a financial institution approved by a recognized option clearing corporation.
         (3)    The requirements of this section 5782 apply, regardless of any otherwise available margin
                reduction or margin offset, in the following circumstance:
                (i)     where an over-the-counter option is written by a client that is not an acceptable institution,
                        acceptable counterparty or regulated entity,
                (ii)    where the terms of the over-the-counter option require settlement by physical delivery of
                        the underlying interest, and
                (iii)   where a margin rate less than 100% for the underlying interest has not been established
                        under the Corporation requirements.
5783. Option spreads and combinations
         (1)    Except as otherwise provided in this section 5783, the same reduced margin offsets are
                permitted for over-the-counter options as are provided in sections 5730 through 5772 for
                exchange-traded options, provided that the underlying interest is the same.
         (2)    In the case of spreads involving European exercise over-the-counter options:
                (i)     a margin offset is permitted where the spread consists of long and short European exercise
                        option contracts with the same expiration date, and
                (ii)    a margin offset is permitted where the spread consists of a short European exercise option
                        and long American exercise option, however
                (iii)   a margin offset is not permitted where the spread consists of a long European exercise option
                        and a short American exercise option.
5784. Confirmation, delivery and exercise
         (1)    The Dealer Member must confirm every over-the-counter option transaction in writing, by mail or
                delivery, on trade date.
         (2)    Over-the-counter option contract payments, settlement, exercise and delivery must be made
                according to the terms of the over-the-counter option contract.




Series 5000 | Dealer Member Margin Rules                                                                       Rule 5700
                                                           Investment Dealer and Partially Consolidated Rules

5785. - 5789. Reserved.

FUTURES CONTRACTS AND FUTURES CONTRACT OPTIONS
5790. Minimum margin requirements
         (1)    Where a Dealer Member inventory or client account contains positions and offsets in futures
                contracts or futures contract options, the margin required is the greatest of:
                (i)     the margin required by the futures exchange on which the contract is entered into,
                (ii)    the margin required by the clearing corporation, and
                (iii)   the margin required by the Dealer Member’s clearing broker, where applicable.
         (2)    Where a client in subsections 5790(1) or 5776(2) is an acceptable institution, acceptable
                counterparty or regulated entity, the Dealer Member must include the margin deficiency in the
                margin on client or brokers and dealers accounts when calculating its risk adjusted capital, as of
                the date the deficiency occurs, where the Dealer Member:
                 (i)     does not promptly call for margin, or
                 (ii)    has promptly made a call for margin, but has not received the required margin by the end
                         of the next trading day after the date the deficiency occurs.
         (3)    Where a Dealer Member or a client, owns a commodity and also has a short position in a futures
                contract in the same commodity, the two positions may be offset and the required margin shall
                be computed with respect to the net long or net short position where:
                (i)     ownership of the commodity is evidenced by warehouse receipts or comparable
                        documentation, and
                (ii)    the futures contract position is not subject to the domestic gross customer margin model.
         (4)    Where a futures exchange or its clearing corporation prescribes margin requirements based on
                initial and maintenance rates, the margin required at the time the contract is entered shall be
                based on the prescribed initial rate. When subsequent adverse price movements in the value of
                the contracts reduce the margin on deposit to an amount below the maintenance level, a further
                amount to restore the margin on deposit to the initial rate amount shall be required. The Dealer
                Member may, in addition, require such further margin or deposit against liability as it may
                consider necessary as a result of fluctuations in market prices from time to time.
         (5)    Where client trades are executed through an omnibus account, the Dealer Member shall require
                margin from each of its clients as though the trades were executed in separate fully disclosed
                accounts.
         (6)    Where spread margins are permitted in a client account, the Dealer Member shall note this in the
                margin records for this account.
         (7)    Where a Dealer Member’s inventory account holds inter-commodity spreads in Government of
                Canada bond futures contracts and U.S. treasury bond futures contracts traded on a futures
                exchange in Canada and the United States and equivalent quantities of each position in the
                spread are held, the margin required is the greater of the margin required on either the long side
                or the short side only. For this purpose, the foregoing spreads shall be on the basis of $1.00
                Canadian for each $1.00 U.S. of the contract size of the relevant futures contracts. With respect


Series 5000 | Dealer Member Margin Rules                                                                     Rule 5700
                                                        Investment Dealer and Partially Consolidated Rules

                to the United States side of the above inter-commodity spreads, such positions must be
                maintained on a contract market as designated pursuant to the United States Commodity
                Exchange Act.
         (8)    The Corporation may prescribe, in its discretion, higher or lower margin requirements for any
                account or person that holds positions in futures contracts or futures contract options.
5791. - 5799. Reserved.




Series 5000 | Dealer Member Margin Rules                                                                  Rule 5700
                                                             Investment Dealer and Partially Consolidated Rules

RULE 5800 | ACCOUNT RELATED AGREEMENTS

5801. Introduction
         (1)    Rule 5800 sets out the specific Corporation requirements for the following account related
                agreements:
                (i)     the Corporation standard agreements [section 5810],
                (ii)    account guarantee agreements [sections 5820 through 5825],
                (iii)   hedge agreements [section 5830],
                (iv)    cash and securities loan agreements [section 5840], and
                (v)     repurchase agreements and reverse repurchase agreements [section 5850].
5802. - 5809. Reserved.
5810. Corporation standard agreements
         (1)    The Corporation prescribes certain contents for and has developed standard forms of,
                agreements that a Dealer Member must use in order to obtain favourable margin treatment, or
                avoid capital penalties, under Rules 5200 through 5900. These agreements are described in
                sections 5820 through 5850 below and, in the case of the standard form new issue letter, in
                section 5530. The standard agreements posted on the Corporation’s website are provided as
                agreement forms acceptable to the Corporation.
5811. - 5819. Reserved.
5820. General account guarantee requirements
         (1)    Subject to the requirements in sections 5821 and 5822, a Dealer Member may permit a client (the
                guarantor) to guarantee the accounts of another client provided:
                (i)     the Dealer Member informs the guarantor in writing of the initial contingent liability they
                        will be assuming by signing the guarantee agreement,
                (ii)    the Dealer Member discloses to the guarantor in writing that the suitability of transactions
                        in the guaranteed client’s accounts will not be reviewed in relation to the guarantor,
                (iii)   the guarantor signs an approved written guarantee agreement with the Dealer Member
                        that:
                        (a)     identifies the guarantor by name,
                        (b)     identifies the guarantor accounts that are to be used to provide the guarantee,
                        (c)     identifies the accounts of the other client that are subject to the guarantee,
                        (d)     binds the guarantor, its successors, assigns and personal legal representatives, and
                        (e)     contains the minimum terms set out in subsection 5825(1),
                (iv)    the guaranteed client consents in writing to the Dealer Member providing the guarantor, at
                        least quarterly, with the guaranteed client’s account statements,
                (v)     where the guarantor does not object, the guarantor is sent, at least quarterly, the
                        guaranteed client’s account statements,




Series 5000 | Dealer Member Margin Rules                                                                         Rule 5800
                                                             Investment Dealer and Partially Consolidated Rules

                (vi)    the guarantor’s accounts that are not subject to a futures segregation and portability
                        customer protection regime are not guaranteeing any accounts that are subject to a futures
                        segregation and portability customer protection regime, and
                (vii) the guarantor’s accounts that are subject to a futures segregation and portability customer
                      protection regime are not guaranteeing any accounts that are not subject to a futures
                      segregation and portability customer protection regime.
         (2)    Where the guaranteed client does not consent to providing account statements, the Dealer
                Member must notify the guarantor in writing of the guaranteed client’s refusal and that the
                guarantee agreement will not be accepted for margin reduction purposes.
5821. Requirements for account guarantees by shareholders, Registered Representatives or employees
         (1)    Section 5820 notwithstanding, a Dealer Member may only permit clients who are shareholders,
                Registered Representatives or employees of the Dealer Member to guarantee the accounts of
                another client:
                (i)     if:
                        (a)     the Corporation expressly approves the guarantee arrangement in writing,
                        (b)     the guarantee agreement can only be cancelled with the Corporation’s written
                                approval,
                        (c)     the guarantor is not permitted to transfer cash, securities or any other property from
                                the accounts of the guarantor without written approval from the Corporation,
                        (d)     the provisions of Schedule 4 of Form 1 continue to apply to the guaranteed client
                                accounts regardless of the guarantee. Specifically, if the account has been restricted
                                and subsequently fully margined, the Dealer Member will not conduct any trading in
                                the account without the Corporation approving the release of the guarantee,
                or
                (ii)    if, in the case of a shareholder guarantee:
                        (a)     there is public ownership of the Dealer Member or holding company securities held
                                by the shareholder,
                        (b)     the shareholder is not an employee, Registered Representative or Executive of the
                                Dealer Member, and
                        (c)     the shareholder does not hold a significant equity interest (defined in clause 2102(1))
                                of the Dealer Member or its holding company.
5822. Prohibited account guarantee arrangements
         (1)    A Dealer Member will not permit relief for guarantees in respect of accounts of Executives,
                Directors, shareholders, Registered Representatives or employees, by clients of the Dealer
                Member.
5823. Exception for immediate family
         (1)    Sections 5821 and 5822 do not apply to guarantees by members of the immediate family of the
                guaranteed account holder.



Series 5000 | Dealer Member Margin Rules                                                                        Rule 5800
                                                             Investment Dealer and Partially Consolidated Rules

5824. Margin relief for guarantee agreements
         (1)    For account guarantee agreements entered into in compliance with the requirements of sections
                5820 and 5821, the margin required for a client account that is guaranteed by another client may
                be reduced by any aggregate excess margin in the account of the guarantor.
         (2)    Subsection 5824(1) notwithstanding, a Dealer Member may only use a client guarantee for
                margin relief with respect to client accounts directly guaranteed by the guarantor.
         (3)    Subsection 5824(1) notwithstanding, margin relief is not permitted where a guarantee agreement
                is not confirmed by the guarantor in response to an annual audit confirmation request in
                accordance with the requirements set out in subsection 4185(1).
5825. Account guarantee agreement minimum terms
         (1)    An approved written agreement must contain the following minimum terms:
                (i)     the guarantor is jointly and severally liable for the client’s obligations in the identified
                        accounts and unconditionally guarantees, on an absolute and continuing basis, the prompt
                        payment on demand of all the client’s present and future liabilities in those accounts to the
                        Dealer Member,
                (ii)    the guarantee’s termination requires written notice to the Dealer Member and the
                        termination does not affect the guarantee of any obligations incurred prior to it,
                (iii)   the Dealer Member is not required to demand from, or proceed or exhaust its remedies
                        against, a client or any other person, or any security held to secure payment of the
                        obligations, before making demand or proceeding under the guarantee,
                (iv)    the guarantor’s liability shall not be released, discharged, reduced, limited or otherwise
                        affected by:
                        (a)     any right of set-off, counterclaim, appropriation, application or other demand or right
                                the client or guarantor may have,
                        (b)     any irregularity, defect, or informality in any obligation, document or transaction
                                relating to the client or its accounts,
                        (c)     any acts done, omitted, suffered or permitted by the Dealer Member in connection
                                with the client, its accounts, the guaranteed obligations or any other guarantees or
                                security held including any renewals, extensions, waivers, releases, amendments,
                                compromises or indulgences agreed to by the Dealer Member and including the
                                Dealer Member providing the client’s account statements to the guarantor as
                                permitted in clause 5820(1)(iv), or
                        (d)     the death, incapacity, bankruptcy or other fundamental change of or affecting the
                                client,
                        but if the guarantor is released from the guarantee, it must remain liable as principal
                        debtor of the guaranteed obligations,
                (v)     the guarantor must:
                        (a)     agree that the accounts as settled or stated between the Dealer Member and the
                                client are conclusive as to the amounts owing, and



Series 5000 | Dealer Member Margin Rules                                                                        Rule 5800
                                                             Investment Dealer and Partially Consolidated Rules

                        (b)     agree not to exercise any rights of subrogation until all guaranteed obligations are
                                paid in full, and
                (vi)    all securities, monies, futures contracts and futures contract options, foreign exchange
                        contracts and other property held or carried by the Dealer Member for the guarantor must
                        be pledged or a security interest granted in them to secure payment of the guaranteed
                        obligations. The Dealer Member must be able to deal with those assets at any time, before
                        or after demand under the guarantee, to satisfy payment.
5826. - 5829. Reserved.
5830. Hedge agreements
         (1)    In determining the margin relief available for a guaranteed client account pursuant to subsection
                5824(1), a Dealer Member may exclude the following offsetting position hedges from the margin
                calculation:
                         Long position                                       Short position
                 (i)     a long security position (other than an       and a short position in the same security,
                         option, futures contract or foreign               held in the guaranteed client account.
                         exchange contract position) held in the
                         account of a guarantor that guarantees
                         an account of another client of a Dealer
                         Member in accordance with sections
                         5820 through 5825.
                 (ii)    a long convertible security position          and a short position in the underlying
                         (including warrants, rights, shares and           security, held in the guaranteed client
                         installment receipts) held in the account         account.
                         of a guarantor that guarantees an
                         account of another client of a Dealer
                         Member in accordance with sections
                         5820 through 5825.
         (2)    A Dealer Member must not accept a client account hedge for the purposes of subsection 5830(1),
                unless it obtains a written hedge agreement from the guarantor, in a form acceptable to the
                Corporation, that:
                (i)     authorizes the Dealer Member to use any and all securities, other than options, futures
                        contracts or foreign exchange contracts, held in long positions in the guarantor’s account to
                        hedge any and all short positions in the guaranteed client account to eliminate the margin
                        required on those securities in the client account,
                (ii)    provides that if a security position that hedges a short position is sold and creates a margin
                        deficiency in the guaranteed account, the guarantor agrees that the Dealer Member may
                        restrict the guarantor’s ability to withdraw cash or securities from its account or otherwise
                        restrict the guarantor’s ability to enter into transactions in that account until the deficiency
                        has been rectified, and
                (iii)   provides that the guarantor agrees that the terms of the hedge agreement must remain in
                        effect as long as any hedge positions between the two accounts remain in effect.

Series 5000 | Dealer Member Margin Rules                                                                        Rule 5800
                                                              Investment Dealer and Partially Consolidated Rules

5831. - 5839. Reserved.
5840. Cash and securities loan agreements
         (1)    A cash and securities loan is the lending of securities for cash collateral or vice versa, other than
                an overnight cash loan.
         (2)    To avoid the margin penalties in Form 1 for cash and securities loan transactions, a Dealer
                Member must be party to a written agreement that contains the minimum terms set out in
                subsection 5840(3).
         (3)    This written cash and securities loan agreement must:
                (i)     set out the rights of each party to retain and realize on the securities delivered to it by the
                        other party under the agreement if the other party defaults. These rights are in addition to
                        other remedies in the agreement or available at law,
                (ii)    set out events of default,
                (iii)   provide for treatment of the securities or collateral value held by the non-defaulting party
                        that is over the amount owed by the defaulting party, and
                (iv)    either:
                        (a)     give the parties the right to set off their mutual debts, or
                        (b)     enable the parties to effect a secured loan and provide that the lender must
                                continuously segregate agreement collateral securities.
         (4)    If the parties agree to a secured loan as provided in sub-clause 5840(3)(iv)(b), and there is more
                than one method for the lender to perfect its security interest in the collateral, the lender must
                choose the method to achieve the highest priority in a default situation.
         (5)    Whether the parties rely on set off or agree to a secured loan as provided in clause 5840(3)(iv),
                the written cash and securities loan agreement must provide for the securities borrowed and
                loaned to be free and clear of any trading restrictions under applicable laws, and signed for
                transfer.
5841. - 5849. Reserved.
5850. Repurchase agreements and reverse repurchase agreements
         (1)    To avoid the margin penalties in Form 1 for repurchase agreement and reverse repurchase
                agreement transactions, a Dealer Member must be party to a written agreement that contains
                the minimum terms set out in subsection 5850(2).
         (2)    A written agreement for repurchase agreement transaction/reverse repurchase agreement
                transaction must:
                (i)     set out the rights of each party to retain and realize on the securities delivered to it by the
                        other party under the agreement if the other party defaults. These rights are in addition to
                        other remedies in the agreement or available at law,
                (ii)    set out events of default,
                (iii)   provide for treatment of the securities or collateral value held by the non-defaulting party
                        that is over the amount owed by the defaulting party, and
                (iv)    either:

Series 5000 | Dealer Member Margin Rules                                                                        Rule 5800
                                                              Investment Dealer and Partially Consolidated Rules

                       (a)     give the parties the right to set off their mutual debts, or
                       (b)     enable the parties to effect a secured loan and provide that the lender must
                               continuously segregate agreement collateral securities.
         (3)    If the parties agree to the agreement as provided in sub-clause 5850(2)(iv)(b), and there is more
                than one method for the lender to perfect its security interest in the collateral, the lender must
                choose the method to achieve the highest priority in a default situation.
         (4)    Whether the parties rely on set off or agree to a secured loan as provided in clause 5850(2)(iv),
                the written agreement for repurchase agreement transaction/reverse repurchase agreement
                transaction must provide for the sold or purchased securities to be free and clear of any trading
                restrictions under applicable laws, and signed for transfer.
5851. - 5899. Reserved.




Series 5000 | Dealer Member Margin Rules                                                                      Rule 5800
                                                             Investment Dealer and Partially Consolidated Rules

RULE 5900 | AGREEMENT RELATED MARGIN REQUIREMENTS

5901. Introduction
         (1)    The general margin requirements for call loan, cash and securities loan, repurchase agreements
                and reverse repurchase agreements that are entered into between a Dealer Member and a
                counterparty client are set out in Form 1. Rule 5900 sets out specific margin requirements that
                apply to securities loan, repurchase agreements and reverse repurchase agreements where,
                amongst other things, the compensation, price differential, fee, commission of other financing
                charge to be paid in connection with the agreement is calculated according to a fixed rate.
5902. Definitions
         (1)    The following term has the meaning set out below when used in the Rule:
                  “fixed rate”             A rate expressed as a price, decimal, or percentage per year or expressed in
                                           another manner that does not vary until the termination of the relevant
                                           agreement.

5903. Margin requirements for securities loan, repurchase agreements, and reverse repurchase agreements
      with term risk
         (1)    Despite any margin requirement set out in Form 1 regarding a securities loan, repurchase
                agreement or reverse repurchase agreement, if the special conditions set out in the chart below
                are met, the minimum Dealer Member inventory margin requirement for unhedged agreement
                positions is as follows:

                  Position                                  Special conditions                Margin required
                  Unhedged position
                  Securities loan, repurchase          the obligation to              The minimum Dealer Member
                  agreement, or reverse                 repurchase, resell or          inventory margin required for
                  repurchase agreement                  terminate the loan is          any unhedged term risk shall
                                                        outstanding for more than      be determined by multiplying:
                                                        five business days,            (i) the relevant margin rate
                                                       the date of repurchase,            for a Government of
                                                        resale, or termination of a        Canada debt security with
                                                        loan is decided at the time        a term to maturity that is
                                                        of entering into the               equal to the remaining
                                                        transaction,                       term of the loan /
                                                                                           agreement, as set out in
                                                                                           section 5210(1)(i),
                                                                                       by
                                                                                       (ii) the loan / agreement
                                                                                            market value.




Series 5000 | Dealer Member Margin Rules                                                                       Rule 5900
                                                        Investment Dealer and Partially Consolidated Rules


                  Position                            Special conditions                 Margin required
                  Unhedged position
                                                  the amount of any
                                                   compensation, price
                                                   differential, fee,
                                                   commission, or other
                                                   financing charge to be paid
                                                   in connection with the
                                                   repurchase, resale, or loan
                                                   is calculated according to a
                                                   fixed rate, and
                                                  the Dealer Member must
                                                   perform the calculations
                                                   daily and make full provision
                                                   for any principal and return
                                                   of capital then payable, and
                                                   for all accrued interest,
                                                   dividends, or other
                                                   distributions on securities
                                                   used as collateral.

         (2)    Despite any margin requirement set out in Form 1 regarding a securities loan, repurchase
                agreement or reverse repurchase agreement, if the special conditions set out in the chart below
                are met, the minimum Dealer Member inventory margin requirements for offsets involving
                agreement positions is as follows:

                  Position                            Special conditions                 Margin required
                  Offsetting positions
                  Securities loan versus          the date of repurchase,         The minimum Dealer Member
                  securities loan                  resale, or termination of a     inventory margin required for
                  or                               loan is less than one year      any residual offset term risk is
                                                   away for each of the            the difference between the
                  Repurchase agreement versus
                                                   offsetting positions,           unhedged margin calculated
                  reverse repurchase agreement
                                                  the offsetting positions are    for the two loan / agreement
                                                   denominated in the same         positions pursuant to
                                                   currency, and                   subsection 5903(1)

                                                  the offsetting positions
                                                   meet the special conditions
                                                   set out in subsection
                                                   5903(1) for unhedged
                                                   positions.


Series 5000 | Dealer Member Margin Rules                                                                    Rule 5900
                                                      Investment Dealer and Partially Consolidated Rules


                  Position                           Special conditions               Margin required
                  Offsetting positions
                  Securities loan versus        the date of repurchase,        The minimum Dealer Member
                  securities loan                resale, or termination of a    inventory margin required for
                  or                             loan is greater than or        any residual offset term risk
                                                 equal to one year away for     shall be determined by
                  Repurchase agreement versus
                                                 each of the offsetting         multiplying:
                  reverse repurchase agreement
                                                 positions,                    (i) the relevant margin rate
                                                 the offsetting positions are      for a Government of
                                                  in the same maturity band         Canada debt security with
                                                  for margin purposes and are       a term to maturity that is
                                                  denominated in the same           equal to the remaining
                                                  currency, and                     terms of the loans /
                                                 the offsetting positions          agreements, as set out in
                                                  meet the special conditions       section 5210(1)(i),
                                                  set out in subsection        by
                                                  5903(1) for unhedged         (ii) the net market value of
                                                  positions.                        the two loans /
                                                                                    agreements.

5904. - 5999. Reserved.
6000. – 6999. Reserved.




Series 5000 | Dealer Member Margin Rules                                                                Rule 5900
                                                                 Investment Dealer and Partially Consolidated Rules


SERIES 7000 | DEBT MARKETS AND INTER-DEALER BOND BROKERS RULES

RULE 7100 | DEBT MARKETS

7101. Introduction
         (1)     Rule 7100 establishes trading and settlement practices to promote fair and efficient debt
                 securities markets. Unless expressly indicated, Rule 7100 makes no distinction between
                 institutional and retail markets.
         (2)     For greater certainty, the provisions set forth in Rule 7100 shall not be construed to abrogate or
                 derogate from any other provision of general applicability found elsewhere within Corporation
                 requirements.
         (3)     Rule 7100 is divided into the following parts:
                 Part A - General
                            [sections 7102 and 7103]
                 Part B - Debt market trading
                            [sections 7104 through 7113]

PART A - GENERAL
7102. General requirements
         (1)     A Dealer Member must ensure that its trading in the debt securities markets does not contravene
                 any applicable laws, regulation, direction, or requirement, whether or not such requirement is
                 binding or has the force of law, including without limitation the directions or requirements of the
                 Bank of Canada or the Department of Finance (Canada).
         (2)     A Dealer Member must not condone or knowingly facilitate conduct by its affiliates, clients, or
                 counterparties that contravenes Rule 7100.
7103. Policies and procedures
         (1)     A Dealer Member’s policies and procedures must specifically address trading and conduct in the
                 debt securities market to provide reasonable assurance of compliance with securities laws and
                 Corporation requirements.
         (2)     A Dealer Member’s policies and procedures must specifically address the following items for the
                 debt securities markets:
                 (i)     restrictions of, and controls over, trading in non-client accounts,
                 (ii)    a prohibition on the use of inside information,
                 (iii)   a prohibition of front-running,
                 (iv)    standards for fair allocation of new issues among clients,
                 (v)     standards for prompt and accurate disclosure to clients and counterparties if any conflict of
                         interest arises, and
                 (vi)    for retail client accounts:



Series 7000 | Debt Markets and Inter-Dealer Bond Brokers Rules                                                Rule 7100
                                                                 Investment Dealer and Partially Consolidated Rules

                         (a)     written policies or guidelines issued to its Registered Representatives on the Dealer
                                 Member’s mark-ups, mark-downs and commissions on debt securities sold to clients
                                 or purchased from clients, and
                         (b)     reasonable monitoring procedures to detect mark-ups, mark-downs or commissions
                                 that exceed the maximums specified by the Dealer Member, and to ensure any
                                 deviation is justified.
         (3)     An Executive responsible for the appropriate business group of the Dealer Member must approve
                 the policies, procedures and internal controls referred to in section 7103.
         (4)     A Dealer Member must regularly review its policies and procedures to ensure they are
                 appropriate for the size, nature, and complexity of the Dealer Member’s business.

PART B - DEBT MARKET TRADING
7104. Trading personnel
         (1)     A Dealer Member must ensure that all personnel trading in the debt securities markets are:
                 (i)     properly qualified and trained, and
                 (ii)    aware of Corporation requirements and applicable laws relating to debt securities market
                         trading.
         (2)     A Dealer Member must ensure that its personnel use clear and unambiguous language in their
                 trading activities.
         (3)     A Dealer Member’s personnel must be familiar with the appropriate trading terminology and
                 conventions.
         (4)     A Supervisor in the appropriate business group of the Dealer Member must supervise its trading
                 activities.
7105. Confidentiality
         (1)     Except with the express permission of the party concerned or as required by applicable laws, a
                 Dealer Member:
                 (i)     must ensure that its dealings with clients and counterparties are confidential,
                 (ii)    must not disclose or discuss, or request that others disclose or discuss, any client’s or
                         counterparty’s participation in the debt securities markets or the terms of any trading or
                         anticipated trading, and
                 (iii)   must ensure on a pre-trade basis that its own trading activities and planning strategies are
                         kept confidential for market integrity purposes.
         (2)     A Dealer Member’s policies and procedures relating to debt securities must specifically address:
                 (i)     restricting access to confidential information to the personnel that require it for their jobs,
                 (ii)    confining trading by designated personnel to restricted-access office areas, and
                 (iii)   using secure forms of communications and technology.
         (3)     A Dealer Member that is a Government Securities Distributor (defined in section 7202) must
                 comply with requests for information from the Bank of Canada.



Series 7000 | Debt Markets and Inter-Dealer Bond Brokers Rules                                                   Rule 7100
                                                                 Investment Dealer and Partially Consolidated Rules

7106. Resources and systems
         (1)     A Dealer Member must have sufficient capital, liquidity support, and personnel to support its
                 trading activities.
         (2)     A Dealer Member must have comprehensive operating systems, including all aspects of risk
                 management, transaction valuation, technology, and financial reporting to ensure full support for
                 trading.
7107. Conflicts of interest
         (1)     A Dealer Member must ensure that its dealings in debt securities markets are fair and
                 transparent.
         (2)     A Dealer Member must fulfill its duties to clients before its own interests or those of its
                 personnel.
7108. Duty to deal fairly
         (1)     A Dealer Member must observe high standards of ethics and conduct in transacting business to
                 maintain investor confidence in the debt securities markets.
         (2)     A Dealer Member must prohibit any business conduct or practice that is unbecoming or
                 detrimental to the public interest.
         (3)     A Dealer Member must act fairly, honestly, and in good faith when marketing, entering into,
                 carrying out, and administering trades in the debt securities markets.
7109. Manipulative and deceptive practices in the debt markets
         (1)     In its trading activities in the debt securities markets, a Dealer Member must not, directly or
                 indirectly, engage or participate in any act, method or practice it knows or ought reasonably to
                 know is manipulative or deceptive.
         (2)     Without limiting the conduct prohibited by Rule 7100, the following are manipulative or
                 deceptive practices:
                 (i)     carrying out trades intended to artificially increase trading volumes,
                 (ii)    carrying out trades intended to artificially change trading prices,
                 (iii)   participating in or tacitly consenting to spreading rumours or information about issuers
                         that are known, or ought reasonably to be known, to be false or misleading,
                 (iv)    disseminating any information that falsely states or implies governmental approval of any
                         institution or trading, or
                 (v)     conspiring or colluding with another market participant to manipulate or unfairly deal in
                         the debt securities markets.
7110. Taking unfair advantage
         (1)     A Dealer Member must not engage in trading practices that take unfair advantage of clients or
                 counterparties by:
                 (i)     acting on knowledge of a new issue or client order to unfairly profit from the expected
                         market movement or distorted market levels,



Series 7000 | Debt Markets and Inter-Dealer Bond Brokers Rules                                                 Rule 7100
                                                                 Investment Dealer and Partially Consolidated Rules

                 (ii)    carrying out proprietary trades ahead of client orders on the same side of the market
                         without first disclosing to the client the intention to do so and obtaining the client’s
                         approval,
                 (iii)   profiting unfairly by using proprietary information that if released could reasonably be
                         expected to affect market prices,
                 (iv)    using material non-public information,
                 (v)     abusing market procedures or conventions to obtain an unfair advantage over, or unfairly
                         prejudice, its counterparties or clients, or
                 (vi)    completing a trade when the price is clearly outside of the prevailing market and proposed
                         or agreed to as a result of a manifest error.
7111. Derivatives trading
         (1)     The prohibitions in sections 7109 and 7110 apply to trading in derivatives of debt securities.
7112. Prohibited practices
         (1)     A Dealer Member must not accept any order or carry out any trade where the Dealer Member
                 knows, or has reasonable grounds to believe, the result would contravene Corporation
                 requirements or any applicable laws.
         (2)     An Approved Person or employee of a Dealer Member must not accept any material
                 consideration, including remuneration, gratuity or benefit, from any person other than the Dealer
                 Member for any activities conducted on behalf of a client.
         (3)     A Dealer Member must not offer any consideration, including remuneration, gratuity, or benefit,
                 to any partner, director, officer, employee, agent or shareholder of a client or any associate of
                 such persons, unless the prior written consent of the client has been obtained.
         (4)     Consideration that is non-monetary, of minimal value and infrequent such that it will not cause a
                 reasonable person to question whether it created a conflict of interest is not consideration under
                 subsections 7112(2) and 7112(3).
7113. Surveillance and reporting
         (1)     A Dealer Member must monitor the trading and conduct of its employees and agents in the debt
                 securities markets.
         (2)     A Dealer Member must promptly report to the Corporation or other authority having jurisdiction,
                 including the Bank of Canada:
                 (i)     any breaches of Corporation requirements, or
                 (ii)    suspicious or irregular market conduct.
         (3)     When requested by the Corporation or the Bank of Canada (with respect to Government of
                 Canada securities), a Dealer Member and any related company must disclose, on a confidential
                 basis, the respective par value of each of its holdings in certain specified assets, in the form
                 prescribed by the Bank of Canada (also known as a “Net Position Report”). On request, a Dealer
                 Member must also provide any other information to identify large holdings that would permit a
                 participant to have undue influence over the debt securities markets.
7114. – 7199. Reserved.

Series 7000 | Debt Markets and Inter-Dealer Bond Brokers Rules                                                  Rule 7100
                                                                    Investment Dealer and Partially Consolidated Rules

RULE 7200 | TRANSACTION REPORTING FOR DEBT SECURITIES

7201. Introduction
         (1)     Rule 7200 requires Dealer Members to report information about each of their transactions (and
                 the transactions of any affiliate that is a Government Securities Distributor (defined in section
                 7202)) in debt securities to the Corporation through a system maintained by the Corporation.
         (2)     The reported transaction data required by Rule 7200 is used in the Corporation’s surveillance of
                 the debt securities market to identify potential market abuses such as violations of the fair pricing
                 requirements of section 3125, insider trading and market manipulation. It also supports the
                 Corporation’s general inspection and enforcement activities, rulemaking, and other regulatory
                 functions. The trade data received pursuant to Rule 7200 enables appropriate oversight to ensure
                 the integrity of over-the-counter debt securities market trading and strengthen standards of
                 investor protection.
         (3)     For the purposes of Rule 7200, fact that a security was issued in another country or denominated
                 in a foreign currency does not disqualify it from being a debt security.
7202. Definitions
         (1)     The following terms have the meaning set out below when used in Rule 7200:
                   “authorized agent”                   A Dealer Member or other business entity that has successfully enrolled
                                                        with the Corporation under section 7205 to submit debt securities
                                                        transaction reports on behalf of Dealer Members.
                   “CUSIP”                              Committee on Uniform Securities Identification Procedures.
                   “file receipt”                       An electronic acknowledgement that confirms the transaction reporting
                                                        data file has been successfully transmitted.
                   “Government Securities               An entity that has been given notice of its status as such by the Bank of
                   Distributor”                         Canada and applies to those bidders eligible to participate directly in the
                                                        tender process at Government of Canada auctions.
                   “ISIN”                               International Securities Identification Number.
                   “MTRS 2.0”                           The Market Trade Reporting System operated by the Corporation for
                                                        reporting debt securities transactions.
                   “MTRS 2.0 Enrollment Form” The form filed by a Dealer Member with the Corporation to supply contact
                                              and other information that may be needed by the Corporation in
                                              connection with the Dealer Member’s reporting of debt securities
                                              transactions. An MTRS 2.0 Enrollment Form must also be filed by any
                                              party seeking to act as an authorized agent for a Dealer Member in
                                              reporting transaction data to MTRS 2.0.
                   “riskless principal trade”           A trade in a debt security that involves two offsetting orders (buy and sell)
                                                        that are filled through transactions executed against a Dealer Member’s
                                                        trading or other proprietary account, with the execution of one of the
                                                        orders dependent upon the receipt or execution of the other. A riskless
                                                        principal trade results in two offsetting principal transactions on the

Series 7000 | Debt Markets and Inter-Dealer Bond Brokers Rules                                                               Rule 7200
                                                                    Investment Dealer and Partially Consolidated Rules

                                                        Dealer Member’s books, rather than one agency transaction. A Dealer
                                                        Member typically performs a riskless principal trade to fill a client order
                                                        with an offsetting transaction in the market or with another client.
                   “special condition indicator”        A code used on a transaction report to indicate that the transaction has
                                                        certain attributes. Among other uses, the special condition indicator helps
                                                        to identify transactions that may be priced differently than other
                                                        transactions in the same issue (for instance, a primary market transaction
                                                        subject to a fixed price offering agreement). Special condition indicators
                                                        are also used to identify repurchase agreement transactions, transactions
                                                        that involve parties related to the Dealer Member executing the
                                                        transaction, and certain other conditions that may apply to a transaction
                                                        and that are relevant to the regulatory and market surveillance purposes
                                                        of Rule 7200.

7203. Reporting requirements
         (1)     Every Dealer Member must report each of its transactions in debt securities (including repurchase
                 agreement transactions or reverse repurchase agreement transactions) and the transactions in
                 debt securities (including repurchase agreement transactions or reverse repurchase agreement
                 transactions) of any affiliate that is a Government Securities Distributor, to the Corporation within
                 the timeframes and in the manner specified in Rule 7200, subject to the exceptions stated below
                 in subsection 7203(2).
         (2)     The following must not be reported under subsection 7203(1):
                 (i)     a transaction in debt securities that have no ISIN or CUSIP number assigned on the date of
                         trade execution, except that, if that transaction is a new issue of a debt security, it shall be
                         reported within the timeframe stated in clause 7204(1)(ii),
                 (ii)    a transaction in exchange listed debt securities executed on a Marketplace that transmits to
                         the Corporation trade information required under National Instrument 23-101,
                 (iii)   a transaction between two separate business units or profit centres within the reporting
                         Dealer Member where there is no change in beneficial ownership,
                 (iv)    a repurchase agreement transaction or reverse repurchase agreement transaction executed
                         by a Dealer Member that is not a Government Securities Distributor,
                 (v)     a transaction in which the Bank of Canada or the Bank of Canada on behalf of the
                         Government of Canada is the counterparty, and
                 (vi)    a transaction, other than a repurchase agreement transaction or reverse repurchase
                         agreement transaction, executed by an affiliate that is a Government Securities Distributor
                         only for Government of Canada treasury bills, in a debt security with an original term to
                         maturity of greater than one year.
         (3)     Reporting responsibilities in the most common situations are as follows:
                 (i)     in a transaction between a Dealer Member and a client or non-client, the Dealer Member
                         reports,
                 (ii)    in a transaction between a Dealer Member and an inter-dealer bond broker or issuer, the
                         Dealer Member reports, and

Series 7000 | Debt Markets and Inter-Dealer Bond Brokers Rules                                                                Rule 7200
                                                                 Investment Dealer and Partially Consolidated Rules

                 (iii)   in a transaction between a Dealer Member and an Alternative Trading System, the Dealer
                         Member must report. In a transaction between an Alternative Trading System and a client,
                         the Alternative Trading System reports.
         (4)     A Dealer Member may use an authorized agent to submit transactions to MTRS 2.0. A Dealer
                 Member utilizing an authorized agent for transaction reporting remains responsible for
                 compliance with Rule 7200.
         (5)     A Dealer Member is required to obtain a Legal Entity Identifier and must comply with all
                 applicable requirements imposed by the Global Legal Entity Identifier System.
         (6)     Transaction reports made under subsection 7203(1) must accurately and completely reflect the
                 reported transaction and must contain the following data elements relevant to a bond or
                 repurchase agreement transaction or reverse repurchase agreement transaction, as applicable:
                   No.         Data                                  Description
                   1.          SECURITY IDENTIFIER                   The ISIN number or CUSIP number assigned to the
                                                                     securities in the transaction
                   2.          SECURITY IDENTIFIER TYPE              The type of identifier that was submitted, ISIN or CUSIP
                   3.          TRADE IDENTIFIER                      Unique identifier assigned to the transaction by the
                                                                     reporting Dealer Member
                   4.          ORIGINAL TRADE IDENTIFIER             Included on trade cancelations or corrections
                   5.          TRANSACTION TYPE                      Indicates whether the transaction is new, a cancelation,
                                                                     or a correction
                   6.          EXECUTION DATE                        The day the transaction was executed
                   7.          EXECUTION TIME                        The time at which the transaction was executed, either
                                                                     as recorded by an electronic trading system or time of
                                                                     entry into a trade booking system
                   8.          SETTLEMENT DATE                       The date the transaction is reported to settle
                   9.          TRADER IDENTIFIER                     Assigned by reporting Dealer Member to identify the
                                                                     individual/desk responsible for the transaction
                   10.         REPORTING DEALER IDENTIFER            The Legal Entity Identifier of the reporting Dealer
                                                                     Member
                   11.         COUNTERPARTY TYPE                     Indicates whether the counterparty was a client, non-
                                                                     client, a Dealer Member, a Dealer Member acting as an
                                                                     Alternative Trading System, an inter-dealer bond broker
                                                                     (IDBB), an issuer or a bank
                   12.         COUNTERPARTY IDENTIFIER               The Legal Entity Identifier of the counterparty, when the
                                                                     counterparty is a Dealer Member, bank, inter-dealer
                                                                     bond broker (IDBB), or Alternative Trading System. Bank
                                                                     trades are defined as trades with Schedule I chartered
                                                                     banks and Canadian offices of Schedule II chartered
                                                                     banks


Series 7000 | Debt Markets and Inter-Dealer Bond Brokers Rules                                                             Rule 7200
                                                                 Investment Dealer and Partially Consolidated Rules

                   No.         Data                                  Description
                   13.         CLIENT ACCOUNT TYPE                   Indicates whether the client is a retail client or an
                                                                     institutional client. This field must be populated if the
                                                                     counterparty type is ‘client’
                   14.         CLIENT LEI                            The Legal Entity Identifier of the client supervised as an
                                                                     institutional client.
                   15.         CLIENT ACCOUNT IDENTIFIER             The account number of the client supervised as a retail
                                                                     client.
                   16.         INTRODUCING/ CARRYING DEALER          Indicates whether the reporting Dealer Member acted in
                               INDICATOR                             the capacity of an introducing broker or carrying broker
                   17.         ELECTRONIC EXECUTION                  Indicates if the transaction was executed on or
                               INDICATOR                             facilitated through an electronic trading venue
                   18.         TRADING VENUE IDENTIFER               The Legal Entity Identifier of the electronic trading
                                                                     venue
                   19.         SIDE                                  Indicates whether the reporting Dealer Member was a
                                                                     buyer or seller
                   20.         QUANTITY                              Par value of securities
                   21.         PRICE                                 The price at which the transaction was executed,
                                                                     including any mark-ups or mark-downs or commission
                   22.         BENCHMARK SECURITY IDENTIFIER         The ISIN or CUSIP of the bond used as pricing
                                                                     benchmark (if any)
                   23.         BENCHMARK SECURITY IDENTIFIER         The type of identifier that was submitted, ISIN or CUSIP
                               TYPE
                   24.         YIELD                                 The yield as stated on the client confirmation
                   25.         COMMISSION                            For retail client transactions, the total amount of any
                                                                     mark-up or mark-down, commission or other services
                                                                     charges as stated on the client confirmation
                   26.         CAPACITY                              Indicates whether the Dealer Member acted as principal
                                                                     or agent (riskless principal trades reported as principal)
                   27.         PRIMARY MARKET                        Special condition indicator to indicate that the
                                                                     transaction is being submitted by an underwriter of a
                                                                     new issue of debt securities and that, at the time of the
                                                                     transaction, the securities were subject to a fixed price
                                                                     offering agreement. “Take-down” allocations from a
                                                                     syndicate manager to syndicate members are included
                                                                     in this designation as well as customer allocations by
                                                                     any member of the underwriting group subject to a
                                                                     fixed price offering agreement at the time of trade



Series 7000 | Debt Markets and Inter-Dealer Bond Brokers Rules                                                           Rule 7200
                                                                 Investment Dealer and Partially Consolidated Rules

                   No.         Data                                  Description
                   28.         RELATED PARTY INDICATOR               Special condition indicator to indicate that the
                                                                     counterparty is an affiliate of the Dealer Member
                   29.         NON RESIDENT INDICATOR                Special condition indicator to indicate that the
                                                                     transaction is one with a non-resident counterparty
                   30.         FEE BASED ACCOUNT INDICATOR           Special condition indicator to indicate that the
                                                                     transaction is for a retail client account paying non-
                                                                     transaction-based fees as partial or full remuneration for
                                                                     the Dealer Member’s transaction execution services
                   Elements specific to repurchase agreement transactions or reverse repurchase agreement transactions:
                   No.         Data                                  Description
                   31.         REPO AGREEMENT IDENTIFIER             Unique identifier assigned to the repurchase agreement
                                                                     transaction or reverse repurchase agreement
                                                                     transaction by the reporting Dealer Member
                   32.         REPO TYPE                             Indicates whether the transaction was conducted as
                                                                     part of a repurchase agreement, a reverse repurchase
                                                                     agreement, a sell/buy-back, or a buy/sellback
                   33.         REPO TERM                             Indicates whether the repurchase agreement
                                                                     transaction or reverse repurchase agreement
                                                                     transaction has fixed term or is an open term
                                                                     repurchase agreement transaction or reverse repurchase
                                                                     agreement transaction.
                                                                     May indicate whether repurchase agreement
                                                                     transaction or reverse repurchase agreement
                                                                     transaction is evergreen or extendable. Optional values
                   34.         REPO MATURITY DATE                    The maturity date if the repurchase agreement
                                                                     transaction or reverse repurchase agreement
                                                                     transaction has a term
                   35.         CURRENCY OF REPO                      The currency denomination of the cash payment used
                                                                     for the initial purchase of the security in a repurchase
                                                                     agreement or reverse repurchase agreement
                   36.         REPO RATE                             The repurchase agreement or reverse repurchase
                                                                     agreement interest rate. If the interest rate is not a term
                                                                     of the contract, then it is the interest rate implied by the
                                                                     difference between the sale (purchase) price and its
                                                                     repurchase (resale) price
                   37.         REPO HAIRCUT                          The repurchase agreement or reverse repurchase
                                                                     agreement haircut. If the haircut is not a term of the
                                                                     contract, then it is the haircut implied by the disparity



Series 7000 | Debt Markets and Inter-Dealer Bond Brokers Rules                                                           Rule 7200
                                                                 Investment Dealer and Partially Consolidated Rules

                   No.         Data                                  Description
                                                                     between the purchase price and the market value of the
                                                                     security at the time of initial purchase
                   38.         REPO COLLATERAL SECURITY TYPE         Where the Dealer Member is aware of the collateral
                                                                     being used, indicates the type of identifier that was
                                                                     submitted for a single security, (ISIN or CUSIP), or if the
                                                                     repurchase agreement transaction or reverse repurchase
                                                                     agreement transaction is for multiple securities.
                                                                     Where the Dealer Member is not aware of the collateral
                                                                     being used, indicates general.
                   39.         REPO COLLATERAL SECURITY              The ISIN or CUSIP number of the security underlying a
                               IDENTIFER                             repurchase agreement transaction or reverse repurchase
                                                                     agreement transaction at the beginning of the
                                                                     agreement if a single security is used as collateral
                   40.         CLEARING HOUSE                        If the repurchase agreement transaction or reverse
                                                                     repurchase agreement transaction was centrally
                                                                     cleared, the Legal Entity Identifier of the central clearing
                                                                     house
                   41.         TRI-PARTY REPO INDICATOR              Indicates whether the repurchase agreement transaction
                                                                     or reverse repurchase agreement transaction is a tri-party
                                                                     repo.

         (7)     The reporting Dealer Member must ensure that the registration status of its Legal Entity Identifier
                 has not lapsed.
7204. Reporting timeframes
         (1)     A Dealer Member must ensure that a transaction report for which the Dealer Member is
                 responsible is received by the Corporation in proper form and with complete and accurate
                 information within the following timeframes:
                 (i)     for transactions in debt securities with ISIN or CUSIP Numbers assigned on the date of trade
                         execution:
                         (a)     if the date of trade execution is a business day and the time of transaction execution
                                 is no later than 4:00 p.m., the report must be made no later than 10:00 p.m. on the
                                 same business day as the date of trade execution,
                         (b)     if the date of trade execution is a business day and the time of transaction execution
                                 is after 4:00 p.m., the report:
                                 (I) may be made by 10:00 p.m. on the same business day as the date of the
                                     transaction execution, and
                                 (II) must be made no later than 10:00 p.m. on the first business day following the
                                      date of trade execution, and
                         (c)     for all other transactions, including those executed on a Saturday, Sunday, or any
                                 officially recognized Federal or Provincial statutory holiday on which the system is


Series 7000 | Debt Markets and Inter-Dealer Bond Brokers Rules                                                           Rule 7200
                                                                 Investment Dealer and Partially Consolidated Rules

                                 closed, the report must be made no later than 10:00 p.m. on the first business day
                                 following the date of trade execution,
                 provided, however, that:
                 (ii)    for transactions in new issue debt securities with no ISIN or CUSIP number assigned, a
                         transaction report required under clause 7203(2)(i) must be made:
                         (a)     where the ISIN or CUSIP is assigned before 4:00 p.m., no later than 10:00 p.m. on the
                                 same business day that the ISIN or CUSIP number is assigned,
                         (b)     where the ISIN or CUSIP is assigned after 4:00 p.m., no later than 10:00 p.m. on the
                                 first business day following the day that the ISIN or CUSIP was assigned.
         (2)     Upon a successful submission and receipt by the Corporation of transaction reports, MTRS 2.0
                 provides the submitter with file receipts, which must be retained by the Dealer Member:
                 (i)     in a central, readily accessible place for a period of two years from the date of each file
                         receipt, and
                 (ii)    in any location from which the File Receipts may be retrieved within a reasonable period of
                         time for a period of seven years from the date of each file receipt.
7205. Enrollment requirements
         (1)     A Dealer Member or authorized agent that will submit debt securities transaction reports to MTRS
                 2.0 must enroll in MTRS 2.0 and receive file submission credentials from the Corporation by
                 completing the MTRS 2.0 Enrollment Form with all required information, including technical and
                 business contact points.
         (2)     Once enrolled, Dealer Members remain responsible for keeping all information on the MTRS 2.0
                 Enrollment Form up to date.
7206. – 7299. Reserved.




Series 7000 | Debt Markets and Inter-Dealer Bond Brokers Rules                                                   Rule 7200
                                                                    Investment Dealer and Partially Consolidated Rules

RULE 7300 | INTER-DEALER BOND BROKERS

7301. Introduction
         (1)     Rule 7300 describes Corporation requirements for inter-dealer bond brokers used by Dealer
                 Members. Its purposes are to ensure the financial viability of inter-dealer bond brokers and make
                 the debt securities market more efficient.
         (2)     Rule 7300 is divided into the following parts:
                 Part A - General requirements
                            [section 7303]
                 Part B - Requirements for inter-dealer bond broker approval and continued approval
                            [sections 7304 and 7305]
                 Part C - Changes to Corporation requirements for inter-dealer bond brokers
                            [section 7306]
7302. Definitions
         (1)     The following terms have the meaning set out below when used in Rule 7300:
                  “domestic debt securities”          Canadian dollar denominated debt securities issued or primarily traded in
                                                      Canadian markets, whether issued by the Government of Canada, a
                                                      province, a municipality, a crown corporation, or a private sector
                                                      corporation, and includes securities being traded on a "when issued" basis.
                                                      Eurodollar debt securities are not domestic debt securities.
                  “inter-dealer bond broker           A person permitted by an inter-dealer bond broker to use its services to
                  client”                             trade domestic debt securities.
                  “inter-dealer bond broker           An individual supervised or controlled by an inter-dealer bond broker client,
                  trader”                             either through an employee or other similar relationship, who is authorized
                                                      by the inter-dealer bond broker client to use the inter-dealer bond broker to
                                                      buy or sell domestic debt securities for that inter-dealer bond broker client.
                  “information processor”             Any person that receives and provides information under National
                                                      Instrument 21-101 and has filed a 21-101F5 and, in Québec, that is a
                                                      recognized information processor.


PART A - GENERAL REQUIREMENTS
7303. Dealer Members must trade through a Corporation approved inter-dealer bond broker
         (1)     A Dealer Member that trades domestic debt securities through the facilities of an inter-dealer
                 bond broker must do so through a Corporation approved inter-dealer bond broker. Trades must
                 comply with the inter-dealer bond broker’s operating procedures and Corporation requirements.

PART B - REQUIREMENTS FOR INTER-DEALER BOND BROKER APPROVAL AND CONTINUED APPROVAL
7304. Eligibility of inter-dealer bond broker for Corporation approval
         (1)     An applicant for Corporation approval as an inter-dealer bond broker must:


Series 7000 | Debt Markets and Inter-Dealer Bond Brokers Rules                                                               Rule 7300
                                                                 Investment Dealer and Partially Consolidated Rules

                 (i)     be registered or licensed in each province or territory where it requires registration or
                         licensing,
                 (ii)    comply with securities laws and requirements of any securities regulatory authority having
                         jurisdiction over the applicant, and
                 (iii)   comply with the standards and conditions of approval described in section 7305.
         (2)     An applicant for approval as an inter-dealer bond broker must submit its application to the
                 Corporation together with any information required by Corporation requirements.
7305. Corporation requirements for inter-dealer bond broker approval and continued approval
         (1)     An inter-dealer bond broker must comply with the requirements in section 7305 to be approved
                 by the Corporation and to retain its approval.
         (2)     An inter-dealer bond broker must have and maintain at least $500,000 of shareholders’ equity, or
                 have a parent corporation with at least $500,000 of shareholders’ equity irrevocably guarantee
                 that amount.
         (3)     An inter-dealer bond broker must:
                 (i)     provide evidence to the Corporation that all of its inter-dealer bond broker clients are and
                         will continue to be:
                         (a)     Dealer Members,
                         (b)     Canadian chartered banks or other organizations described in clause 7305(4)(iii)
                                 below, or
                         (c)     any other Corporation approved financial institution,
                 (ii)    require each new inter-dealer bond broker client, other than a Dealer Member or Canadian
                         chartered bank, to provide it with recent financial statements or other evidence of financial
                         condition and a favourable reference letter from a participant in a Corporation approved
                         inter-dealer bond broker, and
                 (iii)   provide evidence to the Corporation that all of the inter-dealer bond broker traders for its
                         inter-dealer bond broker clients will be located in Canada.
         (4)     Clause 7305(3)(iii) does not apply to an inter-dealer bond broker trader trading for an inter-dealer
                 bond broker client that:
                 (i)     is a Schedule I chartered bank or its affiliate (other than an affiliate, or its subsidiary, whose
                         business is mainly securities),
                 (ii)    is a Schedule II chartered bank or its subsidiary of such a bank whose primary business is
                         not securities (this exception does not apply to inter-dealer bond broker traders of other
                         affiliates of chartered banks), or
                 (iii)   (a)     is a Dealer Member or branch office member,
                         (b)     is a Dealer Member’s affiliate that has entered into an agreement as subsection
                                 7305(7) describes and that either is regulated by the United States Financial Industry
                                 Regulatory Authority or is a member of any other self-regulatory organization or
                                 regulatory authority, or
                         (c)     has entered into an agreement as subsection 7305(7) describes and:
                                 (I)     is not a Dealer Member’s affiliate,

Series 7000 | Debt Markets and Inter-Dealer Bond Brokers Rules                                                     Rule 7300
                                                                 Investment Dealer and Partially Consolidated Rules

                                 (II)    is regulated by the United States Financial Industry Regulatory Authority or is a
                                         member of any other self-regulatory organization or regulatory authority, and
                                 (III)   gives the Corporation a satisfactory legal opinion stating that the inter-dealer
                                         bond broker client does not contravene the registration requirements of
                                         securities laws.
         (5)     The inter-dealer bond broker must only deal in domestic debt securities as agent on behalf of its
                 inter-dealer bond broker clients and must not act as principal, either directly or indirectly.
         (6)     The inter-dealer bond broker must provide accurate and timely information regarding details of
                 orders and trades for domestic debt securities to the information processor, as required by
                 National Instrument 21-101.
         (7)     Inter-dealer bond broker clients outside Canada must sign an agreement under sub-clauses
                 7305(4)(iii)(b) and 7305(4)(iii)(c) that complies with the following provisions:
                 (i)     the parties to the agreement must include the Corporation, the inter-dealer bond broker
                         client outside Canada and, if applicable, the inter-dealer bond broker client’s affiliated
                         Dealer Member,
                 (ii)    an inter-dealer bond broker client outside Canada must state that it is carrying out its
                         trading:
                         (a)     in a jurisdiction in which it either is regulated by the United States Financial Industry
                                 Regulatory Authority or is a member of any other self-regulatory organization or
                                 regulatory authority, or
                         (b)     from a jurisdiction in which the Corporation is satisfied that one of the self-regulatory
                                 organizations specified in sub-clause 7305(7)(ii)(a) has jurisdiction over its trading
                                 activities,
                 (iii)   an inter-dealer bond broker client outside of Canada must agree to give a Dealer Member
                         its domestic debt securities trading activity information so that the Dealer Member can
                         regularly report its aggregated trading to the Corporation under Corporation requirements,
                 (iv)    if the Corporation requests this information for a specific inquiry about domestic debt
                         securities trading, the inter-dealer bond broker client outside Canada must agree to give it,
                         subject to appropriate confidentiality provisions, additional information, and
                 (v)     the agreement must adapt the requirements in clauses 7305(7)(i) through 7305(7)(iv) to
                         the circumstances of the inter-dealer bond broker client.
         (8)     Commission schedule requirements:
                 (i)     An inter-dealer bond broker must publish a commission schedule showing commissions
                         charged for a trade.
                 (ii)    An inter-dealer bond broker must not charge a commission greater than those listed in its
                         commission schedule.
                 (iii)   A change to an inter-dealer bond broker’s commission schedule may be effective from the
                         date the inter-dealer bond broker gives written notice to all its inter-dealer bond broker
                         clients.




Series 7000 | Debt Markets and Inter-Dealer Bond Brokers Rules                                                      Rule 7300
                                                                 Investment Dealer and Partially Consolidated Rules

         (9)     Operating procedures manual and other requirements:
                 (i)     An inter-dealer bond broker must have a current operating procedures manual and
                         appropriate enforcement or compliance procedures to ensure its provisions are observed.
                 (ii)    The inter-dealer bond broker’s operating procedures manual must:
                         (a)     have a code of ethics that includes the following:
                                 (I)     the inter-dealer bond broker will keep confidential all information received
                                         from or about its inter-dealer bond broker clients or their activities, unless that
                                         information must be disclosed for regulatory or compliance reasons,
                                 (II)    all inter-dealer bond broker clients will receive fair treatment, and
                                 (III)   the inter-dealer bond broker will not give to an inter-dealer bond broker client’s
                                         partner, director, officer, employee, agent or shareholder or any associate of
                                         such persons any gift or other incentive to do business unless it is non-
                                         monetary, of minimal value and infrequent such that it will not cause a
                                         reasonable person to question whether it created a conflict of interest,
                         and
                         (b)     describe the minimum capital requirements for its inter-dealer bond broker clients
                                 and the procedure to establish the requirements.
                 (iii)   An approved inter-dealer bond broker must provide a copy of its operating procedures
                         manual to each inter-dealer bond broker client.
                 (iv)    The inter-dealer bond broker must give its inter-dealer bond broker clients two weeks prior
                         written notice of any amendment to its operating procedures manual, unless the
                         Corporation approves a shorter notice period.
         (10) An inter-dealer bond broker must give each of its inter-dealer bond broker clients a daily report
              that describes the net amount of outstanding deliveries and the total amount of outstanding
              deliveries that the inter-dealer bond broker clients had with every other inter-dealer bond broker
              client at the previous day’s close of business in each of the following categories:
                 (i)     domestic debt securities, with 10 years or less to maturity, issued or guaranteed by the
                         Government of Canada or by a Canadian province or municipality,
                 (ii)    domestic debt securities with more than 10 years to maturity, issued or guaranteed by the
                         Government of Canada or a Canadian province or municipality,
                 (iii)   domestic debt securities issued by a corporation, and
                 (iv)    other debt securities, including domestic debt securities not in another category.
         (11) An inter-dealer bond broker must file with the Corporation:
                 (i)     within 140 days of its financial year end, summary statement of financial position
                         information and an auditor’s report, prepared in accordance with generally accepted
                         accounting principles, and
                 (ii)    within 60 days of the interim-period date, interim semi-annual statement of financial
                         position information prepared in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles.




Series 7000 | Debt Markets and Inter-Dealer Bond Brokers Rules                                                       Rule 7300
                                                                 Investment Dealer and Partially Consolidated Rules

         (12) An inter-dealer bond broker must have its auditor confirm to the Corporation, at least annually,
              that the inter-dealer bond broker has met Corporation requirements for continued approval
              under Rule 7300. At a minimum, the confirmation must state the following:
                         “In the course of our audit, nothing came to our attention that caused us to believe
                         that the company held a position in securities for its own account or dealt with any
                         person that is not eligible to be an inter-dealer bond broker client of the company
                         under Rule 7300.”
         (13) The parties to an inter-dealer bond broker client agreement must agree that any disagreement
              between inter-dealer bond broker clients, or between an inter-dealer bond broker client and the
              inter-dealer bond broker, about who is responsible for a financial loss of less than $100,000 must
              go to arbitration under the Arbitrations Act (Ontario). The parties must agree that the following
              provisions govern any arbitration:
                 (i)     Three arbitrators must resolve the disagreement. The arbitrators must be selected as
                         follows:
                         (a)     one arbitrator must be the Chair of the Corporation Fixed Income Committee or, if
                                 the Chair is involved in the disagreement, the Chair’s designate,
                         (b)     the parties to the disagreement must unanimously agree on the selection of one
                                 arbitrator from among all the Corporation approved inter-dealer bond brokers and
                                 their inter-dealer bond broker clients, and
                         (c)     the parties must unanimously agree on the selection of one arbitrator who is
                                 unconnected to either an inter-dealer bond broker client or an inter-dealer bond
                                 broker. If the parties cannot unanimously agree, then a party may apply to have a
                                 judge select one or both arbitrators.
                 (ii)    Subject to co-operation from the parties, the arbitrators must make their decision within
                         two weeks of being notified in writing of their appointment. However, the parties may
                         agree on a later notification date.
                 (iii)   The parties may not appeal the arbitrators’ award under the Arbitrations Act (Ontario).

PART C - CHANGES TO Corporation REQUIREMENTS FOR INTER-DEALER BOND BROKERS
7306. Committee review
         (1)     The Corporation must consult a committee comprised of representatives of parties to which Rule
                 7300 applies, including Dealer Members, inter-dealer bond broker clients outside of Canada, and
                 approved inter-dealer bond brokers, before the Corporation amends Rule 7300 or changes its
                 interpretation of Rule 7300.
7307. – 7999. Reserved.




Series 7000 | Debt Markets and Inter-Dealer Bond Brokers Rules                                                  Rule 7300
                                                           Investment Dealer and Partially Consolidated Rules


SERIES 8000 | PROCEDURAL RULES – ENFORCEMENT

RULE 8100 | ENFORCEMENT INVESTIGATIONS

8101. Introduction
         (1)     Rule 8100 sets out the powers of the Corporation to initiate and conduct enforcement
                 investigations and the rights and obligations of Regulated Persons with respect to such
                 investigations.
8102. Conducting investigations
         (1)     Enforcement Staff may investigate the conduct, business and affairs of a Regulated Person with
                 respect to Corporation requirements, applicable laws, or trading or advising in respect of
                 securities, futures contracts or derivatives.
8103. Investigation powers
         (1)     In connection with an investigation, Enforcement Staff may, by written or electronic request,
                 require a Regulated Person, an employee, partner, director or officer of a Regulated Person, an
                 approved investor, or, where authorized by law, another person to:
                 (i)     provide a written report with respect to any matter,
                 (ii)    produce for inspection any records and documents in the person’s possession or control
                         that Enforcement Staff believe may be relevant to the investigation, whether written,
                         electronically stored or recorded,
                 (iii)   provide copies of any such records and documents in the manner and form, including
                         electronically and recorded, that Enforcement Staff requests, and
                 (iv)    attend and answer questions under oath or otherwise, and any such attendance may be
                         transcribed, recorded electronically, audio-recorded or video-recorded, as Enforcement
                         Staff determines.
         (2)     If Enforcement Staff requires production of original documents in a request made under
                 subsection 8103(1), they must provide a receipt for any original documents received.
         (3)     In connection with an investigation, Enforcement Staff:
                 (i)     may, with or without prior notice, enter the business location of any Regulated Person
                         during business hours,
                 (ii)    are entitled to free access to and to make and keep copies of all books of account,
                         securities, cash, documents, bank accounts, vouchers, correspondence and records of every
                         description that Enforcement Staff believe may be relevant to the investigation, including
                         by taking an image of the computer hard drives of the Regulated Person, and
                 (iii)   may remove the original of any document or record obtained under clause 8103(3)(ii), and
                         where an original document or record is removed from the premises, Enforcement Staff
                         must provide a receipt for the removed document or record.




Series 8000 | Procedural Rules – Enforcement                                                                 Rule 8100
                                                           Investment Dealer and Partially Consolidated Rules

8104. Obligations of Regulated Persons and other persons
         (1)     A person who receives a request made under section 8103 must comply with the request within
                 the time specified in it.
         (2)     If Enforcement Staff make a request under clause 8103(1)(i) or 8103(1)(iv) to a corporation,
                 partnership or other organization, compliance with the request may be fulfilled by an employee
                 of the corporation, partnership or organization who is acceptable to Enforcement Staff, taking
                 into account the employee’s position and knowledge.
         (3)     A person must cooperate with Enforcement Staff who are conducting an investigation, and a
                 Regulated Person must require its employees, partners, directors and officers to cooperate with
                 Enforcement Staff conducting an investigation and to comply with a request made under
                 section 8103.
         (4)     A person who is aware that Enforcement Staff are conducting an investigation must not conceal
                 or destroy any record, document or thing that contains information that may be relevant to the
                 investigation or to any subsequent proceeding relating to the subject matter of the investigation
                 or ask or encourage another person to do so.
         (5)     A Dealer Member or any person approved by, or under the jurisdiction of, the Corporation, that is
                 requested by a Marketplace to provide information in connection with an investigation of trading
                 of a security on that Marketplace shall submit the requested records to the Marketplace making
                 the request in such a manner and form, including electronically, as may reasonably be prescribed
                 by such Marketplace.
8105. Right to counsel
         (1)     A person who attends in response to a request under clause 8103(1)(iv) may be represented by
                 counsel.
8106. Confidentiality of investigations
         (1)     The Corporation may make an order prohibiting a person from communicating, for a specified
                 period, some or all of the following information related to an investigation to another person
                 except the person’s counsel or another individual who represents the person or as required by
                 law:
                 (i)     the nature or content of the investigation or a request under subsection 8103(1),
                 (ii)    the fact of an entry by Enforcement Staff under subsection 8103(3),
                 (iii)   the fact that any report, record, other document or thing was requested, produced,
                         provided, inspected, copied or taken,
                 (iv)    the name of any person required to attend and answer questions, or
                 (v)     any questions asked or any answers given on an attendance.
         (2)     An order made under subsection 8106(1) shall not prohibit disclosure:
                 (i)     of any fact that the person became aware of otherwise than as a result of the conduct of
                         the investigation,
                 (ii)    that is required to fulfill:



Series 8000 | Procedural Rules – Enforcement                                                                  Rule 8100
                                                              Investment Dealer and Partially Consolidated Rules

                         (a)     any request made in connection with an investigation, but only to the extent
                                 necessary to respond to the request,
                         (b)     an obligation of the person under Corporation requirements,
                         (c)     a fiduciary obligation of the person to a Regulated Person, or
                         (d)     a contractual obligation of the person to comply with the policies of a Regulated
                                 Person,
                 (iii)   of information in connection with the imposition of restrictions on a person who is a subject
                         of the investigation, but only to the extent necessary to implement the restrictions, or
                 (iv)    of the existence and nature of an investigation to:
                         (a)     a Regulated Person who is the person’s employer,
                         (b)     an employee of a Regulated Person with supervisory authority over or compliance
                                 responsibility for the person, or
                         (c)     employees of the Regulated Person who are senior to the employees contemplated in
                                 sub-clause 8106(2)(iv)(b), but only to the extent necessary to supervise the person or
                                 allow officers of a Dealer Member or other Regulated Person to inform their board of
                                 directors of an investigation.
         (3)     Notwithstanding an order made under subsection 8106(1), a person may disclose information,
                 with the consent of a hearing panel on a motion under section 8413, if the hearing panel
                 determines that disclosure of that information would not impede the conduct of the investigation
                 and is otherwise justifiable, subject to any terms and conditions that the hearing panel considers
                 appropriate.
8107. Continuing jurisdiction
         (1)     A Regulated Person remains subject to Rule 8100 for six years following the date on which they
                 cease to be:
                 (i)     a Dealer Member, or
                 (ii)    a Dealer Member of the Investment Industry Regulatory Organization of Canada,
                 (iii)   a non-Dealer Member user or subscriber of a Marketplace for which the Corporation is the
                         regulation services provider, or
                 (iv)    a non-Dealer Member user or subscriber of a Marketplace for which the Investment
                         Industry Regulatory Organization of Canada was the regulation services provider, or
                 (v)     an employee, partner, Director, officer or any other representative designated in the
                         Corporation requirements of a Dealer Member, or
                 (vi)    an employee, partner, Director, officer or any other representative designated in the
                         Corporation requirements of a Dealer Member of the Investment Industry Regulatory
                         Organization of Canada, or
                 (vii) an employee, partner, director, officer or any other representative of a non-Dealer Member
                       user or subscriber of a Marketplace for which the Corporation is the regulation services
                       provider, or




Series 8000 | Procedural Rules – Enforcement                                                                     Rule 8100
                                                         Investment Dealer and Partially Consolidated Rules

                 (viii) an employee, partner, director, officer or any other representative of a non-Dealer Member
                        user or subscriber of a Marketplace for which the Investment Industry Regulatory
                        Organization of Canada was the regulation services provider.
8108. – 8199. Reserved.




Series 8000 | Procedural Rules – Enforcement                                                              Rule 8100
                                                               Investment Dealer and Partially Consolidated Rules

RULE 8200 | ENFORCEMENT PROCEEDINGS

8201. Introduction
         (1)     Rule 8200 sets out the authority of the Corporation and hearing panels to hold hearings for
                 enforcement purposes.
         (2)     Enforcement proceedings are intended to ensure compliance with and to enforce Corporation
                 requirements, securities laws, and other requirements relating to trading or advising in respect of
                 securities, futures contracts or derivatives.
         (3)     Rule 8200 is divided into the following parts:
                 Part A - General
                           [sections 8203 through 8208]
                 Part B - Disciplinary proceedings
                            [sections 8209 through 8217]
8202. Definitions
         (1)     The following terms have the meaning set out below when used in Rule 8200:
                  “decision”                   A determination made by a hearing panel under Rule 8200 and includes a
                                               sanction and other order or ruling.
                  “disciplinary hearing”       A hearing under Rule 8200, except for a settlement hearing.


PART A - GENERAL
8203. Hearings
         (1)     A hearing must be conducted in accordance with Rule 8200 and the Rules of Procedure.
         (2)     A hearing panel may hold any hearing and make any decision that is authorized under Rule 8200
                 and the Rules of Procedure.
         (3)     A hearing panel may admit as evidence in a hearing any oral testimony and any document or
                 other thing that is relevant, whether or not given or proven under oath or affirmation or
                 admissible as evidence in a court.
         (4)        A hearing panel may require testimony or other evidence to be given or proven under oath or
                    affirmation.
         (5)     A hearing under Rule 8200 must be open to the public, unless it is:
                 (i)     a settlement hearing, in which case it will be opened to the public only after a settlement
                         agreement has been accepted by the hearing panel,
                 (ii)    a hearing to consider a temporary order under section 8211,
                 (iii)   a hearing or part of a hearing where the hearing panel is of the opinion that the
                         desirability of avoiding disclosure of intimate, personal or other matters outweighs the
                         desirability of allowing the hearing or part of the hearing to be open to the public, or




Series 8000 | Procedural Rules – Enforcement                                                                       Rule 8200
                                                            Investment Dealer and Partially Consolidated Rules

                 (iv)    a hearing held in Québec where the hearing panel, on its own initiative or on the request
                         of a party, orders the hearing or part of the hearing to be closed or prohibits the
                         publication or release of documents in the interest of good morals or public order.
         (6)     A party to an enforcement proceeding may be represented by counsel or, where permitted by
                 law, an agent.
         (7)     A hearing panel must provide written reasons for a decision made by it, including a decision
                 accepting or rejecting a settlement agreement under section 8215, but not including an
                 evidentiary or other procedural ruling, made in the course of a hearing, that is not dispositive of
                 the issues raised in the hearing.
8204. Application and effective date of decisions
         (1)     A decision under Rule 8200 applies in all Districts, unless the hearing panel orders otherwise or
                 unless the application of the decision is limited by law.
         (2)     A decision, other than a ruling in the course of a hearing, is effective on the date the decision is
                 dated by the National Hearing Officer, unless Rule 8200 or the decision provides otherwise, in
                 which case the decision is effective on the date so provided.
         (3)     A sanction, other than a fine or disgorgement, takes effect on the effective date of the decision
                 imposing it, unless the decision provides otherwise.
         (4)     A fine, disgorgement and costs imposed by a decision are payable when the decision is effective,
                 unless the decision provides or the parties agree otherwise.
8205. Commencement of enforcement proceedings
         (1)     The Corporation may commence proceedings and hold hearings, as provided in Rule 8200, to
                 ensure compliance with and to enforce Corporation requirements, securities laws, and other
                 requirements relating to trading or advising in respect of securities, futures contracts and
                 derivatives.
         (2)     A proceeding under Rule 8200 must be commenced by notice of application or notice of hearing
                 in accordance with the Rules of Procedure.
8206. Limitation
         (1)     A Regulated Person remains subject to Rule 8200 for six years following the date on which they
                 cease to be:
                 (i)     a Dealer Member, or
                 (ii)    a Dealer Member of the Investment Industry Regulatory Organization of Canada,
                 (iii)   a non-Dealer Member user or subscriber of a Marketplace for which the Corporation is the
                         regulation services provider, or
                 (iv)    a non-Dealer Member user or subscriber of a Marketplace for which the Investment
                         Industry Regulatory Organization of Canada was the regulation services provider, or
                 (v)     an employee, partner, Director, officer or any other representative designated in the
                         Corporation requirements of a Dealer Member, or




Series 8000 | Procedural Rules – Enforcement                                                                     Rule 8200
                                                           Investment Dealer and Partially Consolidated Rules

                 (vi)    an employee, partner, Director, officer or any other representative designated in the
                         Corporation requirements of a Dealer Member of the Investment Industry Regulatory
                         Organization of Canada, or
                 (vii) an employee, partner, director, officer or any other representative of a non-Dealer Member
                       user or subscriber of a Marketplace for which the Corporation is the regulation services
                       provider, or
                 (viii) an employee, partner, director, officer or any other representative of a non-Dealer Member
                        user or subscriber of a Marketplace for which the Investment Industry Regulatory
                        Organization of Canada was the regulation services provider.
         (2)     The Corporation may commence a proceeding under Rule 8200 against a Regulated Person up to
                 six years after the date of the occurrence of the last event on which the proceeding is based.
         (3)     If a proceeding is commenced within the limitation period in subsection 8206(1) or 8206(2), the
                 respondent remains subject to the requirements of Rule 8200 until the proceeding, including any
                 review or appeal, is completed.
8207. Amounts owing to the Corporation
          (1)       A person remains liable to the Corporation for all amounts owing to the Corporation.
8208. Powers of compulsion
         (1)     A hearing panel may require a Regulated Person, an employee, partner, director or officer of a
                 Regulated Person or the Corporation, including Corporation staff, and, if authorized by law, any
                 other person to attend and give evidence or produce records and documents in connection with a
                 hearing under Rule 8200.
         (2)     A Regulated Person must, upon receipt of an order of a hearing panel or a notice from the
                 National Hearing Officer so requiring:
                 (i)     attend and give evidence, and
                 (ii)    produce for inspection and provide copies of any records or documents in the Regulated
                         Person’s possession or control.
         (3)     If a hearing panel requires an employee, partner, director or officer of a Regulated Person, who is
                 not an Approved Person, to attend at a hearing, the Regulated Person must direct the individual
                 to attend and give evidence.

PART B - DISCIPLINARY PROCEEDINGS
8209. Sanctions for Dealer Members
         (1)     If, after a hearing, a hearing panel finds that a Dealer Member has contravened Corporation
                 requirements, securities laws, or other requirement relating to trading or advising in respect of
                 securities, futures contracts, or derivatives, the hearing panel may impose one or more of the
                 following sanctions:
                 (i)     a reprimand,
                 (ii)    disgorgement of any amount obtained, including any loss avoided, directly or indirectly, as
                         a result of the contravention,


Series 8000 | Procedural Rules – Enforcement                                                                 Rule 8200
                                                               Investment Dealer and Partially Consolidated Rules

                 (iii)   a fine not exceeding the greater of:
                              (a)        $5,000,000 for each contravention, and
                              (b)        an amount equal to three times the profit made or loss avoided by the Dealer
                                         Member, directly or indirectly, as a result of the contravention,
                 (iv)    suspension of Membership in the Corporation or of any right or privilege associated with
                         Membership, including a direction to cease dealing with clients, for any period of time and
                         on any terms and conditions,
                 (v)     imposition of any terms or conditions on the Dealer Member’s continued Membership,
                         including on access to a Marketplace,
                 (vi)    expulsion from Membership and termination of the rights and privileges of Membership,
                         including access to a Marketplace,
                 (vii) permanent bar to membership in the Corporation,
                 (viii) appointment of a Monitor, and
                 (ix)    any other sanction determined to be appropriate under the circumstances.
         (2)     A Dealer Member may be sanctioned under subsection 8209(1) based on the conduct of an
                 employee, partner, Director or officer.
         (3)     A sanction imposed under subsection 8209(1) relating to access to a Marketplace applies to all
                 Marketplaces.
8210. Sanctions for Regulated Persons other than Dealer Members
         (1)     If after a hearing, a hearing panel finds that an Approved Person, a non-Dealer Member user or
                 subscriber of a Marketplace for which the Corporation is the regulation services provider or an
                 employee, partner, director or officer of such a user or subscriber has contravened Corporation
                 requirements, securities laws, or other requirement relating to trading or advising in respect of
                 securities, futures contracts, or derivatives, the hearing panel may impose on such person one or
                 more of the following sanctions:
                 (i)     a reprimand,
                 (ii)    disgorgement of any amount obtained, including any loss avoided, directly or indirectly, as
                         a result of the contravention,
                 (iii)   a fine not exceeding the greater of:
                              (a)        $5,000,000 for each contravention, and
                              (b)        an amount equal to three times the profit made or loss avoided by the person,
                                         directly or indirectly, as a result of the contravention,
                 (iv)    suspension of the person’s approval or any right or privilege associated with such approval,
                         including access to a Marketplace, for any period of time and on any terms and conditions,
                 (v)     imposition of any terms or conditions on the person’s continued approval or continued
                         access to a Marketplace,
                 (vi)    prohibition of approval in any capacity, for any period of time, including access to a
                         Marketplace,


Series 8000 | Procedural Rules – Enforcement                                                                      Rule 8200
                                                             Investment Dealer and Partially Consolidated Rules

                 (vii) revocation of approval,
                 (viii) a permanent bar to approval in any capacity or to access to a Marketplace,
                 (ix)    a permanent bar to employment in any capacity by a Regulated Person, and
                 (x)     any other sanction determined to be appropriate under the circumstances.
         (2)     A sanction imposed under subsection 8210(1) relating to access to a Marketplace applies to all
                 Marketplaces.
         (3)     A director or officer of a Regulated Person may be sanctioned under subsection 8210(1) based on
                 the conduct of the Regulated Person with which he or she is associated.
         (4)     A Regulated Person must not employ, hire, retain, or otherwise engage, in any capacity, a person
                 who is sanctioned under clause 8210(1)(ix).
8211. Temporary orders
         (1)     On application by Enforcement Staff, if a hearing panel is satisfied that the length of time
                 required to conclude a hearing could be prejudicial to the public interest, the hearing panel may,
                 without notice to the respondent, make a temporary order that suspends or restricts a Regulated
                 Person’s rights and privileges and may impose terms and conditions that the hearing panel
                 considers appropriate.
         (2)     A temporary order that is made without notice under subsection 8211(1) expires 15 days after
                 the date on which it is made, unless:
                 (i)     a hearing is commenced within that period to confirm or set aside the temporary order,
                 (ii)    the Regulated Person consents to an extension of the temporary order, or
                 (iii)   a securities regulatory authority orders otherwise.
         (3)     The Corporation must immediately give written notice of a temporary order under subsection
                 8211(1) to every person directly affected by it.
8212. Protective orders
         (1)     On application by Enforcement Staff, a hearing panel may hold a hearing to consider a request for
                 an order under subsection 8212(4), following notice to the respondent in accordance with
                 subsection 8426(1).
         (2)     After a hearing under this section with respect to a Dealer Member, a hearing panel may make
                 one or more of the orders set out in subsection 8212(4), if it finds that:
                 (i)     the Dealer Member or a parent corporation or control person of the Dealer Member has
                         made a general assignment for the benefit of creditors or an authorized assignment or
                         proposal to its creditors, has been declared bankrupt, or is the subject of a winding-up
                         order, an application under the Companies’ Creditors Arrangement Act, R.S.C. 1985, c. C-
                         36, as amended, or similar legislation or an application for its liquidation or dissolution,
                 (ii)    a receiver or receiver-manager has been appointed in respect of all or part of the Dealer
                         Member’s undertaking or property or all or part of the undertaking or property of a parent
                         corporation or control person of the Dealer Member,



Series 8000 | Procedural Rules – Enforcement                                                                    Rule 8200
                                                                 Investment Dealer and Partially Consolidated Rules

                 (iii)   the Dealer Member has tendered its resignation, is not carrying on business as an
                         investment dealer or is in the process of winding up or terminating its business as an
                         investment dealer,
                 (iv)    the Dealer Member’s registration as a dealer under securities laws has lapsed or been
                         suspended or terminated,
                 (v)     a securities regulatory authority, Marketplace, SRO or clearing agency has suspended the
                         Dealer Member’s membership or privileges,
                 (vi)    the Dealer Member has been convicted of contravening a law relating to theft, fraud,
                         misappropriation of funds or securities, forgery, money laundering, market manipulation,
                         insider trading, misrepresentation or unauthorized trading,
                 (vii) the Dealer Member’s continued operation would create a risk of imminent harm to its
                       clients, investors, other Regulated Persons or the Corporation because the Dealer Member:
                         (a)     is in financial or operating difficulty, or
                         (b)     has failed to cooperate in respect of an investigation, or
                 (viii) the Dealer Member has not complied with terms or conditions of a sanction or a
                        prohibition under Part B of Rule 4100 (early warning level 2) to which it is subject.
         (3)     After a hearing under this section with respect to a Regulated Person, other than a Dealer
                 Member, a hearing panel may make one or more of the orders set out in subsection 8212(4), if it
                 finds that:
                 (i)     the person’s registration under securities laws has lapsed or been suspended or
                         terminated,
                 (ii)    a securities regulatory authority has made an order prohibiting the person from trading in
                         securities, acting as a director or officer of a market participant or as a promoter, or
                         engaging in investor relations activities, or has denied the person the use of an exemption
                         under securities laws,
                 (iii)   a Marketplace, SRO or clearing agency has suspended the person or the person’s
                         privileges,
                 (iv)    the person has been convicted of contravening a law relating to theft, fraud,
                         misappropriation of funds or securities, forgery, money laundering, market manipulation,
                         insider trading, misrepresentation or unauthorized trading,
                 (v)     the person’s continued approval would create a risk of imminent harm to clients, investors,
                         other Regulated Persons or the Corporation because the person has failed to cooperate in
                         respect of an investigation, or
                 (vi)    the person has not complied with terms or conditions of a sanction to which the person is
                         subject.
         (4)     After a hearing under this section, a hearing panel may make an order:
                 (i)     suspending membership, approval or access to a Marketplace on any terms and
                         conditions,



Series 8000 | Procedural Rules – Enforcement                                                                      Rule 8200
                                                            Investment Dealer and Partially Consolidated Rules

                 (ii)    with terms and conditions, requiring a Dealer Member that is suspended under this section
                         to take steps to facilitate the orderly transfer of its client accounts to another Dealer
                         Member,
                 (iii)   imposing terms and conditions on continued membership, approval or access to a
                         Marketplace,
                 (iv)    directing immediate cessation of any or all dealing with clients or any other persons,
                 (v)     expelling a Dealer Member from the Corporation and terminating the rights and privileges
                         of Membership,
                 (vi)    revoking approval or access to a Marketplace, or
                 (vii) appointing a Monitor over a Dealer Member’s business and affairs.
         (5)     A person may request, in writing, a review by a hearing panel of a decision made after a hearing
                 under this section, within 30 days after the effective date of the decision.
         (6)     A hearing shall be held as soon as practicable, and no later than 21 days, after a review is
                 requested under subsection 8212(5), unless the person requesting the review and Enforcement
                 Staff agree otherwise.
         (7)     A member of a hearing panel whose decision is the subject of a review under this section may not
                 be a member of the hearing panel on the review.
         (8)     A hearing panel may stay an order made under subsection 8212(4), subject to any terms and
                 conditions it considers appropriate.
         (9)     On a review under this section, a hearing panel may:
                 (i)     affirm the order,
                 (ii)    quash the decision,
                 (iii)   vary the decision or order, or
                 (iv)    make any order authorized by subsection 8212(4).
8213. Monitor
         (1)     If a hearing panel appoints a Monitor under section 8209 or section 8212 with respect to the
                 business and affairs of a Dealer Member, the Monitor has authority to supervise and monitor the
                 Dealer Member’s business and affairs in accordance with the terms and conditions imposed by
                 the hearing panel.
         (2)     A hearing panel may impose any terms and conditions, and any time periods, on a Monitor’s
                 authority with respect to a Dealer Member’s business and affairs that the hearing panel considers
                 appropriate, including authority to:
                 (i)     enter the Dealer Member’s premises and conduct day-to-day monitoring of the Dealer
                         Member’s business activities,
                 (ii)    monitor and review accounts receivable, accounts payable, client accounts, margin, client
                         free credits, banking arrangements and transactions, trading conducted by the Dealer
                         Member for clients and for its own account, payment of debts, creation of new debt and
                         the Dealer Member’s books and records,


Series 8000 | Procedural Rules – Enforcement                                                                      Rule 8200
                                                             Investment Dealer and Partially Consolidated Rules

                 (iii)   make copies of any records or other documents and provide copies of such records and
                         documents to the Corporation or any other regulatory or self-regulatory authority,
                 (iv)    report the Monitor’s findings or observations, on an ongoing or other basis, to the
                         Corporation or any other regulatory or self-regulatory authority,
                 (v)     monitor the Dealer Member’s compliance with any terms or conditions imposed on the
                         Dealer Member by the Corporation or any other regulatory or self-regulatory authority or
                         by the hearing panel, including compliance with any early warning terms and conditions,
                 (vi)    verify and assist with the preparation of any regulatory filings, including the calculation of
                         risk adjusted capital,
                 (vii) conduct or have conducted an appraisal of the Dealer Member’s net worth or a valuation
                       of any of the Dealer Member’s assets,
                 (viii) assist the Dealer Member’s employees in facilitating the orderly transfer of the Dealer
                        Member’s client accounts, and
                 (ix)    pre-authorize cheques issued or payments made by or on behalf of the Dealer Member or
                         distribution of any of the Dealer Member’s assets.
         (3)     A Dealer Member must cooperate with the Monitor, require its employees, partners, Directors
                 and officers to cooperate with the Monitor and take all reasonable steps to have its affiliates and
                 service providers cooperate with the Monitor with respect to the exercise by the Monitor of its
                 authority under this section.
         (4)     The Dealer Member must pay all expenses relating to a Monitor appointed to monitor the Dealer
                 Member’s business and affairs, including the Monitor’s fees.
         (5)     Corporation staff, a Monitor, or a Dealer Member subject to a Monitor may at any time apply to a
                 hearing panel for directions concerning the Monitor’s authority or the conduct of the Monitor’s
                 activities.
         (6)     On an application under subsection 8213(5), a hearing panel may make any order it considers
                 appropriate.
8214. Costs
         (1)     After a hearing under Rule 8200, other than a hearing under section 8211, a hearing panel may
                 order a person who is the subject of a sanction to pay any costs incurred by or on behalf of the
                 Corporation in connection with the hearing and any investigation related to the hearing.
         (2)     Costs ordered under subsection 8214(1) may include:
                 (i)     costs for time spent by Corporation staff,
                 (ii)    fees paid by the Corporation for legal or accounting services or for services rendered by an
                         expert witness,
                 (iii)   witness fees and expenses,
                 (iv)    costs of recording and transcribing evidence and preparation of transcripts, and
                 (v)     disbursements, including travel costs.



Series 8000 | Procedural Rules – Enforcement                                                                     Rule 8200
                                                             Investment Dealer and Partially Consolidated Rules

8215. Settlements and settlement hearings
         (1)     Enforcement Staff may agree in a settlement agreement to settle a proceeding or proposed
                 proceeding against a Regulated Person at any time prior to the conclusion of a disciplinary
                 hearing.
         (2)     A settlement agreement must contain:
                 (i)     a statement of the contraventions agreed to by the respondent, with references to the
                         relevant Corporation requirements and applicable laws,
                 (ii)    the agreed facts,
                 (iii)   the sanctions and costs to be imposed on the respondent,
                 (iv)    a waiver by the respondent of all rights to any further hearing, appeal and review,
                 (v)     a provision that Enforcement Staff will not initiate any further action against the
                         respondent in relation to the matter addressed in the settlement agreement,
                 (vi)    a provision that the settlement agreement is conditional on acceptance by a hearing panel,
                 (vii) a provision that the settlement agreement and its terms are confidential, unless and until it
                       has been accepted by a hearing panel,
                 (viii) a provision that the parties will not make any public statement that is inconsistent with the
                        settlement agreement, and
                 (ix)    any other provisions not inconsistent with clauses 8215(2)(i) through 8215(2)(viii) that the
                         parties agree to include in the settlement agreement.
         (3)     Discussions relating to settlement are on a without prejudice basis to Enforcement Staff and any
                 other person participating in the discussions and must not be used as evidence or referred to in
                 any proceeding.
         (4)     A settlement agreement may impose any obligations on a respondent to which the respondent
                 agrees, whether or not they could be imposed by a hearing panel under Rule 8200.
         (5)     After a settlement hearing, a hearing panel may accept or reject a settlement agreement.
         (6)     A settlement agreement becomes effective and binding on the parties to it upon acceptance by a
                 hearing panel.
         (7)     If a settlement agreement is accepted by a hearing panel, any sanction imposed under it is
                 deemed to have been imposed under Rule 8200.
         (8)     If a settlement agreement is rejected by a hearing panel,
                 (i)     either:
                         (a)    the parties may agree to enter another settlement agreement, or
                         (b)    Enforcement Staff may proceed to a disciplinary hearing based on the same or
                                related allegations and charges,
                 and
                 (ii)    the hearing panel’s reasons for rejecting the settlement agreement must be made
                         available to a hearing panel considering a subsequent settlement agreement based on the


Series 8000 | Procedural Rules – Enforcement                                                                   Rule 8200
                                                           Investment Dealer and Partially Consolidated Rules

                         same or related allegations and charges, but must not be made public or referred to in a
                         subsequent disciplinary hearing.
         (9)     A member of a hearing panel that rejects a settlement agreement may not be a member of a
                 hearing panel that considers a subsequent settlement agreement or conducts a disciplinary
                 hearing based on the same or related allegations.
8216. Failure to pay fine or costs
         (1)     If a Regulated Person does not pay a fine, costs or other amount ordered to be paid by a hearing
                 panel or required to be paid under a settlement agreement, the Corporation may, seven days
                 after sending written notice, summarily suspend the Membership of the Regulated Person and all
                 rights and privileges of the Regulated Person relating to approval or access to a Marketplace, until
                 the fine, costs or other amount has been paid.
8217. Review by a securities regulatory authority
         (1)     A party to a proceeding under Rule 8200 may apply to the securities regulatory authority in the
                 relevant District for review of a final decision in the proceeding.
         (2)     A person who is entitled to request a review of a decision under section 8212 or is the subject of a
                 decision making a temporary order under section 8211 may not apply to a securities regulatory
                 authority for review of the decision, unless the person has requested a review or other hearing by
                 a hearing panel and the hearing panel has made a final decision.
         (3)     For purposes of subsection 8217(1), Enforcement Staff is directly affected by a decision in a
                 proceeding in which Enforcement Staff is a party.
8218. – 8299. Reserved.




Series 8000 | Procedural Rules – Enforcement                                                                 Rule 8200
                                                               Investment Dealer and Partially Consolidated Rules

RULE 8300 | HEARING COMMITTEES

8301. Introduction
         (1)     Rule 8300 requires a hearing committee in each District from which hearing panels must be
                 selected for enforcement and other proceedings and sets out the process for appointing and
                 removing members of hearing committees.
8302. Definitions
         (1)     The following terms have the meaning set out below when used in Rule 8300:
                  “Appointments                  A committee composed of:
                  Committee”                     (i) four members of the Governance Committee established by the Board,
                                                     including its Chair as set out in General By-law No.1, section 12.2,
                                                 (ii) two Non-Independent Directors of the Board as set out in General By-
                                                      law No.1, section 1.1, and
                                                 (iii) the President of the Corporation as set out in General By-law No. 1,
                                                       section 1.1.

8303. District Hearing Committees
         (1)     A hearing committee must be appointed for each District.
         (2)     A member of a hearing committee of a District must reside in the District.
         (3)     Two thirds of the members of a hearing committee, to the extent practicable, must be industry
                 members.
         (4)     One third of the members of a hearing committee, to the extent practicable, must be public
                 members.
         (5)     The chair of a hearing committee must be a public member.
8304. Nominations
         (1)     The Corporation must nominate individuals to be public members and industry members of the
                 hearing committee in each District.
8305. Appointment
         (1)     The Appointments Committee must appoint to the hearing committee of each District a number
                 of suitable and qualified individuals sufficient to conduct hearings in the District.
         (2)     In considering the suitability and qualifications of an individual who is nominated for membership
                 on a hearing committee, the Appointments Committee must take into account the individual’s:
                 (i)     general knowledge of business practices and securities laws,
                 (ii)    experience,
                 (iii)   regulatory background,
                 (iv)    availability for hearings,
                 (v)     reputation in the securities industry,
                 (vi)    ability to conduct hearings in French or English, and

Series 8000 | Procedural Rules – Enforcement                                                                           Rule 8300
                                                              Investment Dealer and Partially Consolidated Rules

                 (vii) eligibility to serve in a particular District.
         (3)     An individual who:
                 (i)     is currently or has been within the previous eighteen months an employee of a Member, a
                         Regulated Person, or an affiliate of a Member or Regulated Person,
                 (ii)    represents any parties to enforcement or other proceedings under Corporation
                         requirements or any person in connection with Corporation requirements, or
                 (iii)   would otherwise raise a reasonable apprehension of bias with respect to matters that may
                         come before a hearing panel,
                 is not eligible for appointment or membership as a public member of a hearing committee.
         (4)     The Appointments Committee must appoint a chair of each hearing committee.
8306. Term of appointment
         (1)     Appointment of an individual to a hearing committee is for a three-year term.
         (2)     A hearing committee member may be reappointed to successive terms.
         (3)     If a hearing committee member’s term expires without reappointment during a hearing in which
                 the member is serving on the hearing panel, the member’s term is extended automatically until
                 the completion of the hearing or if the hearing is a hearing on the merits, the proceeding.
8307. Removal
         (1)     The Appointments Committee may remove a hearing committee member who:
                 (i)     ceases to reside in the hearing committee’s District,
                 (ii)    is precluded from acting as a hearing committee member by a law applicable in the District,
                 (iii)   in the Appointments Committee’s opinion, will raise a reasonable apprehension of bias with
                         respect to matters that may come before a hearing panel, or
                 (iv)    for any other reason, ceases to be suitable or qualified to be a hearing committee member.
         (2)     An individual who is removed by the Appointments Committee must not continue to serve on a
                 hearing panel in any proceeding.
8308. – 8399. Reserved.




Series 8000 | Procedural Rules – Enforcement                                                                 Rule 8300
                                                            Investment Dealer and Partially Consolidated Rules

RULE 8400 | RULES OF PRACTICE AND PROCEDURE

8401. Introduction
         (1)     The Rules of Procedure set out the rules that govern the conduct of the Corporation’s enforcement
                 proceedings and regulatory review hearings to secure fair and efficient proceedings and just
                 determinations.
         (2)     Rule 8400 is divided into the following parts:
                 Part A - General
                            [sections 8403 through 8413]
                 Part B - Enforcement proceedings
                            [sections 8414 through 8429]
                 Part C - Regulatory review hearings
                            [section 8430]
                 Part D - Securities regulatory authority review
                            [section 8431]
8402. Definitions
         (1)     The following terms have the meaning set out when used in Rule 8400:
                   “application”                An application that commences a proceeding under Rule 8200 and
                                                includes an application for a temporary order or a protective order.
                   “commencing notice”          A notice of hearing, notice of application, notice of motion, notice of
                                                prehearing conference and notice of request for review.
                   “decision”                   A determination made by a hearing panel.
                   “document”                   Includes a record, sound recording, videotape, film, photograph, chart,
                                                graph, map, plan, survey, book of account, and information recorded or
                                                stored by means of any electronic or other device.
                   “electronic hearing”         A hearing held by conference telephone or another form of electronic
                                                technology that allows persons to hear one another.
                   “file”                       A file with the National Hearing Officer in accordance with section 8406.
                   “oral hearing”               A hearing at which the parties or their counsel or agents attend before a
                                                hearing panel in person.
                   “prehearing conference”      A prehearing conference held pursuant to section 8416.
                   “regulatory decision”        A decision made under sections 9204, 9206 or 9207 or Part B of Rule
                                                4100.
                   “requesting party”           A person who requests a review hearing under sections 8427 or 8430.
                   “responding party”           A person responding to a motion or to a request for a review hearing
                                                under sections 8427 or 8430.



Series 8000 | Procedural Rules – Enforcement                                                                         Rule 8400
                                                             Investment Dealer and Partially Consolidated Rules

                   “written hearing”             A hearing held by means of an exchange of documents, whether in hard
                                                 copy or by electronic means.


PART A - GENERAL
8403. General principles
         (1)     The Rules of Procedure shall be interpreted and applied to secure a fair hearing and just
                 determination of a proceeding on its merits and the most expeditious and least expensive
                 conduct of the proceeding.
         (2)     No proceeding, document or decision in a proceeding is invalid by reason of a defect or other
                 irregularity in form.
         (3)     Subject to a requirement in the Rules of Procedure, a hearing panel has authority to control the
                 process of a proceeding before it and may exercise any of its powers on its own initiative or at the
                 request of a party, including:
                 (i)     issuing procedural directions or orders with respect to the application of the Rules of
                         Procedure in respect of any proceeding,
                 (ii)    imposing terms or conditions in a direction or order,
                 (iii)   admitting or requiring presentation of evidence on oath, affirmation or otherwise,
                 (iv)    waiving or varying any Rule of Procedure in respect of a proceeding,
                 (v)     requiring parties to file documents electronically, and
                 (vi)    at the request of a party, making an interim decision or order, including a decision or order
                         that is subject to terms and conditions.
         (4)     At the request of a party, a hearing panel may provide for any procedural matter that is not
                 provided for in the Corporation requirements or the Rules of Procedure by analogy to the Rules of
                 Procedure or by reference to the rules of practice or procedure of another SRO or professional
                 association or to the rules applicable to a securities regulatory authority.
8404. Time
         (1)     When computing time under the Rules of Procedure:
                 (i)     the number of days between two events are counted by excluding the day on which the
                         first event occurs and including the day on which the second event occurs,
                 (ii)    if a period of less than seven days is prescribed, only business days are to be counted,
                 (iii)   if the time for doing an act expires on a day that is not a business day, the act may be done
                         on the next business day, and
                 (iv)    a document that is served or filed after 4 p.m. in the time zone of the recipient is deemed
                         to have been served or filed on the next business day.
         (2)     A time period prescribed by the Rules of Procedure may be extended or abridged:
                 (i)     before its expiration, on consent of the parties, or
                 (ii)    before or after its expiration, by a hearing panel on any terms and conditions the hearing
                         panel considers appropriate.


Series 8000 | Procedural Rules – Enforcement                                                                    Rule 8400
                                                             Investment Dealer and Partially Consolidated Rules

8405. Appearance and representation
         (1)     A party in a proceeding may be self-represented or may be represented by counsel or an agent.
         (2)     A self-represented party must file and keep current during a proceeding the party’s address,
                 telephone number, facsimile number and email address, as applicable.
         (3)     A person who appears as counsel or agent for a party in a proceeding must file and keep current
                 during the proceeding the person’s address, telephone number, facsimile number and email
                 address, as applicable, and the name and address of the party represented.
         (4)     A party who is represented by counsel or an agent may:
                 (i)     change the counsel or agent by serving on the counsel or agent and on every other party,
                         and filing, a notice of change giving the name, address, telephone number, facsimile
                         number and email address of the new counsel or agent, as applicable, or
                 (ii)    elect to act in person by serving on the counsel or agent and on every other party, and
                         filing, a notice of intention to act in person, giving the party’s address, telephone number,
                         facsimile number and email address, as applicable.
         (5)     A party who appoints a new counsel or agent in the course of a proceeding must comply with
                 clause 8405(4)(i).
         (6)     Counsel or an agent for a party may withdraw as counsel or agent by serving on the party and
                 other parties and filing a written notice of withdrawal.
         (7)     If counsel or an agent for a party seeks to withdraw as counsel or agent less than 30 days prior to
                 the date on which a matter is scheduled to be heard by a hearing panel, the counsel or agent may
                 withdraw only with leave of the hearing panel obtained on a motion.
         (8)     Where a party is represented by counsel or an agent:
                 (i)     documents served on the party must be served on the party’s counsel or agent, unless the
                         Rules of Procedure require otherwise,
                 (ii)    communications with the party must be with the party’s counsel or agent, and
                 (iii)   the party must address a hearing panel through the party’s counsel or agent.
8406. Service and filing
         (1)     A document required to be served under the Rules of Procedure must be served on all parties to
                 the proceeding.
         (2)     A notice of hearing under section 8414, a notice of application under section 8425 or 8426, a
                 notice of request for review from a decision made under Rule 9200 and a decision of a hearing
                 panel on the merits of such a proceeding that is served on an Approved Person must, for
                 information purposes, be sent concurrently to the Dealer Member that employs the Approved
                 Person.
         (3)     Subject to subsection 8406(4), a document required to be served must be served by one of the
                 following methods:
                 (i)     personal delivery to the party,
                 (ii)    delivery to the party’s counsel or agent,


Series 8000 | Procedural Rules – Enforcement                                                                    Rule 8400
                                                                Investment Dealer and Partially Consolidated Rules

                 (iii)   delivery to an adult person at the party’s place of residence, employment or business or the
                         place of business of the party’s counsel or agent,
                 (iv)    if the party is a corporation, delivery to an officer, director or agent of the corporation or a
                         person at any place of business of the corporation who appears to be in control or
                         management of the place of business,
                 (v)     if the party is a partnership, delivery to a partner or a person at any place of business of the
                         partnership who appears to be in control or management of the place of business,
                 (vi)    mail or courier to the last known address of the party or the party’s counsel or agent,
                 (vii) electronic transmission to the facsimile number or e-mail address of the party or the party’s
                       counsel or agent, or
                 (viii) by any other means authorized by a hearing panel.
         (4)     A notice of hearing and a notice of application must be served by:
                 (i)     personal delivery to the party,
                 (ii)    registered mail to the party’s last known address,
                 (iii)   delivery to the party’s counsel or agent, with the consent of counsel or the agent,
                 (iv)    any other method set out in subsection 8406(3) to which the party consents, or
                 (v)     any other means authorized by a hearing panel.
         (5)     Service of a document is deemed to be effective, when delivered no later than 4 p.m. in the time
                 zone of the recipient:
                 (i)     by delivery, on the day of delivery,
                 (ii)    by mail, on the fifth day after mailing,
                 (iii)   electronically, on the day of transmission,
                 (iv)    by courier, on the earlier of the day noted on the delivery receipt or the second day after
                         the day on which it was given to the courier, or
                 (v)     by any other means authorized by a hearing panel, on the day the document is served by
                         the means so authorized.
         (6)     Service of a document may be proved by an affidavit of the person who served it.
         (7)     A document required to be filed under the Rules of Procedure must be filed by delivering or
                 sending by mail, courier or facsimile transmission four copies of the document, with proof of
                 service, to the National Hearing Officer at the Corporation’s offices in the District in which the
                 proceeding is conducted.
         (8)     The National Hearing Officer may:
                 (i)     require more or permit fewer than four copies of a document to be filed, and
                 (ii)    permit or require filing of a document by e-mail, provided that the party also files four
                         printed copies forthwith.
         (9)     A party who serves or files a document must include with it:
                 (i)     the party’s name, address, telephone number, facsimile number and e-mail address, as
                         applicable, or


Series 8000 | Procedural Rules – Enforcement                                                                      Rule 8400
                                                            Investment Dealer and Partially Consolidated Rules

                 (ii)    if the party is represented by counsel or an agent, the name, address, telephone number,
                         facsimile number and e-mail address of the party’s counsel or agent,
                 (iii)   the name of the proceeding to which the document relates, and
                 (iv)    the name of each party, counsel or agent served with the document.
         (10) Subject to Corporation requirements, a document that is filed must be made available by the
              National Hearing Officer for public inspection in the office in which the document is filed during
              the Corporation’s normal business hours, unless confidentiality is requested and a hearing panel
              applying the standard in clause 8203(5)(iii) or 8203(5)(iv) orders otherwise.
8407. National Hearing Officer
         (1)     The National Hearing Officer administers all proceedings brought pursuant to the Rules of
                 Procedure, including:
                 (i)     the selection of members of hearing panels,
                 (ii)    scheduling and arranging hearings and prehearing conferences,
                 (iii)   care, custody and distribution to members of hearing panels of filed documents,
                 (iv)    maintaining a hearing record, including original exhibits,
                 (v)     dating and distributing written hearing panel decisions and reasons to parties to a
                         proceeding,
                 (vi)    issuing and serving a notice or summons to attend and testify or produce documents,
                         where so authorized by a decision of a hearing panel, and
                 (vii) any other administrative functions that are reasonably necessary for the efficient conduct
                       of a proceeding.
         (2)     The National Hearing Officer acts as liaison between members of a hearing panel and parties to a
                 proceeding and, other than in the course of an oral hearing or electronic hearing, a party must
                 communicate to a hearing panel through the National Hearing Officer and serve all other parties
                 with the communication.
         (3)     The National Hearing Officer may seek the advice of the chair of a hearing committee with
                 respect to legal, administrative or procedural issues.
         (4)     The National Hearing Officer, after consultation with the chairs of the hearing committees in all
                 Districts, may publish on the Corporation’s website guidelines concerning practices to be followed
                 under the Rules of Procedure.
         (5)     The National Hearing Officer may prescribe the form and format of documents and forms that are
                 required to be filed under the Rules of Procedure.
         (6)     The National Hearing Officer may designate individuals to perform the functions for which the
                 National Hearing Officer is responsible under the Rules of Procedure.
8408. Hearing panels
         (1)     The National Hearing Officer is responsible for the selection of members of a hearing panel from
                 members of a hearing committee.



Series 8000 | Procedural Rules – Enforcement                                                                   Rule 8400
                                                             Investment Dealer and Partially Consolidated Rules

         (2)     In connection with the selection of a hearing panel, the National Hearing Officer may consult with
                 or seek the advice of the chair of a hearing committee.
         (3)     For a hearing under sections 8209, 8210, 8215 or Rule 9300, the National Hearing Officer must,
                 subject to subsections 8408(4) and 8408(6), select two industry members and one public member
                 from the hearing committee of the applicable District as members of the hearing panel.
         (4)     If the chairs of both hearing committees consent, the National Hearing Officer may select a
                 member of a hearing committee in one District to serve on a hearing panel in another District, but
                 a hearing panel that considers a matter that relates to conduct in Québec must have a majority of
                 members who reside in Québec.
         (5)     The National Hearing Officer must appoint a public member as the chair of a hearing panel, and if
                 the matter relates to conduct in Québec, the chair must be a public member of the hearing
                 committee in the Québec District.
         (6)     The National Hearing Officer may appoint a one-member hearing panel consisting of a public
                 member of a hearing committee in a proceeding under section 8211 or section 8212, a motion or
                 prehearing conference, or to act as case manager of a proceeding.
         (7)     The National Hearing Officer must not select an individual to be a member of a hearing panel, if
                 the individual:
                 (i)     is an officer, partner, director, employee or associate of, or is providing services to, a party
                         or if a party is an affiliate, associate or employee of another person with whom the
                         individual is in such a relationship,
                 (ii)    has or had another relationship to a party or matter that may create a reasonable
                         apprehension of bias,
                 (iii)   is precluded from acting as a member of the hearing panel by Corporation requirements,
                         any law applicable in the District in which the hearing is held or by the recognition order or
                         registration under securities laws of a Marketplace whose rules are the subject of the
                         hearing, or
                 (iv)    was consulted by or advised the National Hearing Officer in connection with the selection
                         of the hearing panel.
         (8)     The National Hearing Officer may not select an individual who is a member of a hearing panel in a
                 proceeding under sections 8211 or 8212 as a member of a hearing panel on a subsequent hearing
                 relating to the same matter, including a motion for a stay of a sanction imposed under section
                 8212, unless all parties consent to the selection of the member.
         (9)     The National Hearing Officer may not select a member of a hearing panel who participates in a
                 prehearing conference or who case manages a proceeding to be a member of the hearing panel
                 on the merits, unless all parties consent to the selection of the member.
         (10) If a member of a hearing panel becomes unable to continue to serve as a member of the hearing
              panel for any reason, the remaining members may continue to hear the matter and render a
              decision, but only with the consent of all parties, and if neither of the remaining members is the
              chair, the hearing panel may retain its own legal counsel to advise it on legal and procedural
              issues, but not on the merits of the proceeding.

Series 8000 | Procedural Rules – Enforcement                                                                      Rule 8400
                                                            Investment Dealer and Partially Consolidated Rules

         (11) A decision of a hearing panel must be made by a majority of its members, and if the hearing
              panel consists of two members, must be unanimous.
8409. Form of hearings
         (1)     Subject to subsections 8409(2) through 8409(9), a hearing panel may conduct a hearing as an oral
                 hearing, electronic hearing or written hearing.
         (2)     Subject to subsections 8409(3) through 8409(9), a written hearing may be held only for:
                 (i)     a motion relating to procedural issues,
                 (ii)    a hearing on agreed facts, and
                 (iii)   any other motion or hearing that a hearing panel considers appropriate.
         (3)     In determining whether to hold a hearing as an oral hearing, electronic hearing or written
                 hearing, a hearing panel may consider any relevant factors, including:
                 (i)     the nature of the hearing, the subject matter of the hearing, and the issues to be
                         addressed, including whether they are issues of fact, law or procedure,
                 (ii)    the evidence to be presented, including whether facts are in dispute and credibility is an
                         issue,
                 (iii)   the cost, efficiency and timeliness of the hearing or the proceeding,
                 (iv)    the fairness of the hearing process to, and the convenience of, each of the parties, and
                 (v)     accessibility to the public.
         (4)     A party may request an electronic hearing or written hearing in a commencing notice.
         (5)     If an electronic hearing or written hearing is requested:
                 (i)     in a notice of hearing, a party may object to the requested form of hearing in the party’s
                         response or by bringing a motion,
                 (ii)    in a commencing notice other than a notice of hearing, a party may object to the requested
                         form of hearing by serving and filing a notice of objection within three days after the
                         commencing notice is served on the party.
         (6)     A notice of objection must state the reasons for the objection, including any prejudice the
                 requested form of hearing may cause the party and the facts on which the party relies and may
                 be accompanied by any evidence on which the party relies for the objection.
         (7)     A hearing panel that receives a notice of objection may:
                 (i)     accept the objection and refer the matter to the National Hearing Officer to set a date for
                         an oral hearing or, with the consent of all parties, set a date for an electronic hearing or
                         schedule for a written hearing,
                 (ii)    reject the objection, or
                 (iii)   order a written hearing to consider the objection and provide other parties an opportunity
                         to respond to the notice of objection in a manner and time that the hearing panel directs.
         (8)     If a notice of objection is filed, the hearing panel must render its decision on the form of hearing
                 in writing as expeditiously as possible, taking into consideration the date and nature of the
                 hearing and proceeding and the needs of the parties to present evidence and prepare and serve
                 submissions and responding submissions.

Series 8000 | Procedural Rules – Enforcement                                                                   Rule 8400
                                                             Investment Dealer and Partially Consolidated Rules

         (9)     Unless a party objects, a hearing panel may, on its own motion, at any stage of a proceeding
                 make an order continuing:
                 (i)     an electronic hearing or written hearing as an oral hearing,
                 (ii)    an oral hearing or a written hearing as an electronic hearing, and
                 (iii)   an oral hearing or an electronic hearing, as a written hearing.
         (10) A hearing panel that orders an electronic hearing may require one or more of the parties
                 (i)     to make the arrangements for the hearing, and
                 (ii)    to pay all or part of the costs of conducting the hearing as an electronic hearing.
8410. Hearing panel decisions
         (1)     A decision of a hearing panel and the reasons for the decision must be dated by the National
                 Hearing Officer and served on each party in accordance with subsection 8406(3).
         (2)     The Corporation must publish on its website a summary of the decision of a hearing panel, except
                 a decision in a prehearing conference, containing:
                 (i)     Corporation requirements or applicable laws that have been contravened,
                 (ii)    the essential facts,
                 (iii)   the decision, including any sanction and costs, and
                 (iv)    except where the decision rejects a settlement agreement, a statement that a copy of the
                         decision may be obtained on the Corporation’s website.
         (3)     The Corporation must publish on its website a decision of a hearing panel and the reasons for the
                 decision, except a decision and reasons rejecting a settlement agreement.
         (4)     A decision made by a hearing panel on the merits of a proceeding must be recorded in the record
                 maintained by the Corporation with respect to the respondent.
         (5)     In addition to a decision accepting a settlement agreement and the reasons for it, the Corporation
                 must publish and record information concerning the accepted settlement agreement in
                 accordance with subsections 8410(2) through 8410(4), as if the settlement agreement were a
                 decision on the merits.
8411. Language of hearings and interpreters
         (1)     A hearing may be conducted in English or French or partly in English or French.
         (2)     A hearing in a District other than Québec must be conducted in English, unless the parties, with
                 the consent of a hearing panel, agree that it be conducted in French.
         (3)     A hearing in Québec must be conducted in French, unless the parties, with the consent of a
                 hearing panel, agree that it be conducted in English.
         (4)     A party who wishes a hearing to be conducted in French, or in Québec in English, must file a
                 request with the National Hearing Officer as soon as possible after the proceeding is commenced.
         (5)     A party who requires an interpreter for a language other than the language in which a hearing is
                 to be conducted, whether to assist the party or for the testimony of a witness to be called by the
                 party, must notify the National Hearing Officer at least 30 days before the commencement of the
                 hearing.

Series 8000 | Procedural Rules – Enforcement                                                                   Rule 8400
                                                            Investment Dealer and Partially Consolidated Rules

         (6)     An interpreter must be competent and independent and must swear or affirm to interpret
                 accurately.
8412. Commencement and abandonment of proceedings
         (1)     A proceeding, and a step in a proceeding that requires a notice, is commenced upon the issuance
                 by the National Hearing Officer of a commencing notice at the request of a party.
         (2)     A party who requests the issuance of a commencing notice must first obtain a date from the
                 National Hearing Officer for:
                 (i)     if the commencing notice is a notice of hearing, an initial appearance before a hearing
                         panel,
                 (ii)    if the commencing notice is a notice of application, the hearing of the application,
                 (iii)   if the commencing notice is a notice of motion, the hearing of the motion,
                 (iv)    if the commencing notice is a notice of prehearing conference, the prehearing conference,
                         or
                 (v)     if the commencing notice is a notice of request for review pursuant to sections 8427 or
                         8430, the review hearing,
                 and must submit a copy of the commencing notice to the National Hearing Officer with a request
                 that it be issued.
         (3)     A request under subsection 8412(2) to the National Hearing Officer for a date or the issuance of a
                 commencing notice must be made on a form prescribed by the National Hearing Officer.
         (4)     If a hearing panel sets a date for a prehearing conference, or other hearing other than in
                 connection with a commencing notice, the National Hearing Officer must give written notice of
                 the date to the parties by mail or electronic transmission in accordance with clause 8406(3)(vi) or
                 8406(3)(vii).
         (5)     Upon issuing a commencing notice or other notice of a hearing, the National Hearing Officer must
                 place a copy of the commencing notice or other notice in a file maintained for the proceeding.
         (6)     The Corporation must publish on its website an announcement of and copy of a commencing
                 notice or other notice as soon as practicable after it is issued by the National Hearing Officer,
                 unless the commencing notice is for an application under section 8211 made without notice to
                 the respondent or is a notice of prehearing conference.
         (7)     A party who initiates a proceeding or a step in a proceeding that requires a notice may abandon
                 the proceeding or step before it has been decided by a hearing panel by serving and filing a
                 notice of abandonment.
         (8)     If a proceeding or a step in a proceeding is abandoned, the Corporation must publish on its
                 website an announcement of and a copy of the notice of abandonment as soon as practicable
                 after it is filed, unless the commencing notice for the proceeding or step has not been so
                 published.
8413.     Motions
         (1)     A motion must be commenced by a notice of motion.

Series 8000 | Procedural Rules – Enforcement                                                                    Rule 8400
                                                            Investment Dealer and Partially Consolidated Rules

         (2)     A motion may be brought:
                 (i)     with the consent of a hearing panel, prior to, or
                 (ii)    at any time after,
                 the commencement of a proceeding.
         (3)     A party who brings a motion must serve and file a motion record at least 14 days prior to the date
                 of the motion, unless the motion is brought during a hearing, in which case the hearing panel
                 may determine the procedure to be followed for the motion.
         (4)     A hearing panel may permit a party to bring a motion without notice to the respondent, if the
                 nature of the motion or the circumstances make service of a notice of motion impractical.
         (5)     A notice of motion must contain:
                 (i)     the date, time and location of the hearing of the motion,
                 (ii)    the relief sought,
                 (iii)   a summary of the grounds for the relief sought, including reference to any Corporation
                         requirements or applicable laws,
                 (iv)    a list of evidence and other materials to be relied on, and
                 (v)     whether it is proposed that the motion be heard as an oral hearing, electronic hearing or
                         written hearing.
         (6)     A motion record must contain:
                 (i)     the notice of motion, and
                 (ii)    copies of the evidence, including affidavits and other materials relied on.
         (7)     A responding party may serve and file a responding record at least nine days prior to the date of
                 the motion, unless the motion is brought during a hearing and the hearing panel orders
                 otherwise.
         (8)     A responding record must contain:
                 (i)     the order requested by the responding party, including a statement of the reasons for the
                         order requested, and
                 (ii)    copies of any additional evidence, including affidavits and other materials relied on.
         (9)     A party who is served with a responding record that contains affidavit evidence may serve and
                 file a reply record containing additional affidavit evidence at least seven days before the date of
                 the motion.
         (10) A party who files an affidavit in connection with a motion must make the person who swears to
              an affidavit reasonably available to be cross-examined by an adverse party prior to the hearing of
              the motion.
         (11) A party who brings a motion may serve and file a memorandum of fact and law at least five days
              before the date of the motion.
         (12) A responding party may serve and file a memorandum of fact and law at least two days before
              the date of the motion.
         (13) A motion must be heard by a hearing panel.

Series 8000 | Procedural Rules – Enforcement                                                                      Rule 8400
                                                             Investment Dealer and Partially Consolidated Rules

         (14) A hearing panel may, on any terms and conditions it considers appropriate, permit oral testimony
              to be adduced at the hearing of a motion on any matter in issue and allow cross-examination of
              the person who swears to an affidavit.
         (15) A hearing panel may:
                 (i)     grant the relief requested in a motion,
                 (ii)    dismiss or adjourn the motion in whole or in part, with or without terms, or
                 (iii)   make another decision it considers appropriate, including adjourning the motion to be
                         heard by the hearing panel that hears the proceeding on its merits.

PART B - ENFORCEMENT PROCEEDINGS
8414. Commencement of disciplinary proceedings
         (1)     Forthwith after a proceeding pursuant to section 8209 or 8210 is commenced, Enforcement Staff
                 must serve the respondent with, and file, the notice of hearing and a statement of allegations.
         (2)     A notice of hearing must contain:
                 (i)     the date, time and location of an initial appearance before a hearing panel,
                 (ii)    a statement of the purpose of the proceeding,
                 (iii)   a statement that the allegations on which the proceeding is based are contained in the
                         statement of allegations,
                 (iv)    a reference to Corporation requirements under which the proceeding is brought,
                 (v)     the nature of the sanctions that may be imposed,
                 (vi)    if the notice of hearing states that the hearing is to be an electronic hearing or written
                         hearing, a statement that the respondent may object to the type of hearing and the
                         procedure to be followed for an objection,
                 (vii) a statement that the respondent must provide a response to the notice of hearing in
                       accordance with section 8415, the time within which a response must be served and filed
                       and the consequences of failing to do so,
                 (viii) a statement that the initial appearance will be followed immediately by an initial
                        prehearing conference, for which a prehearing conference form must be filed in accordance
                        with subsection 8416(5), and
                 (ix)    any other information that Enforcement Staff considers advisable.
         (3)     A statement of allegations may accompany or comprise part of a notice of hearing and must
                 contain:
                 (i)     a reference to Corporation requirements or applicable laws that the respondent is alleged
                         to have contravened,
                 (ii)    the facts alleged in support of the alleged contraventions, and
                 (iii)   the conclusions of Enforcement Staff based on the alleged facts.
         (4)     The date of an initial appearance set out in a notice of hearing must not be less than 45 days after
                 the notice of hearing is served, unless the respondent consents to an earlier date.



Series 8000 | Procedural Rules – Enforcement                                                                     Rule 8400
                                                               Investment Dealer and Partially Consolidated Rules

8415. Response to a notice of hearing
         (1)     A respondent must serve and file a response within 30 days from the date of service of a notice of
                 hearing.
         (2)     A response must contain a statement of:
                 (i)     the facts alleged in the statement of allegations that the respondent admits,
                 (ii)    the facts alleged that the respondent denies and the grounds for the denial, and
                 (iii)   all other facts on which the respondent relies.
         (3)     A hearing panel may accept as proven any facts alleged in a statement of allegations that are not
                 specifically denied or for which grounds for the denial are not provided in a response.
         (4)     If a respondent who has been served with a notice of hearing does not serve and file a response
                 in accordance with subsection 8415(1), the hearing panel may proceed with the hearing of the
                 matter on its merits on the date of the initial appearance set out in the notice of hearing, without
                 further notice to and in the absence of the respondent, and the hearing panel may accept as
                 proven the facts and contraventions alleged in the statement of allegations and may impose
                 sanctions and costs pursuant to section 8209 or 8210, as applicable.
8416. Prehearing conferences
         (1)     At any time prior to commencement of the hearing of a proceeding on the merits:
                 (i)     a hearing panel may order a prehearing conference, or
                 (ii)    a party may request a prehearing conference by serving and filing a notice of prehearing
                         conference at least 14 days before the date of the prehearing conference.
         (2)     A notice of prehearing conference must contain:
                 (i)     the date, time, location and purpose of the prehearing conference,
                 (ii)    any order of a hearing panel concerning the obligations of the parties with respect to the
                         prehearing conference, including:
                              (a)        any requirement concerning the exchange or filing of documents or
                                         submissions pursuant to subsection 8416(7), and if so the issues to be
                                         addressed and the date by which the documents or submissions must be
                                         exchanged and filed,
                              (b)        whether the parties must attend in person,
                 (iii)   a statement that the parties may be represented by counsel or an agent who, if a party is
                         not required to attend, must have authority to make agreements and undertakings on the
                         party’s behalf,
                 (iv)    whether it is proposed that the prehearing conference is to be heard orally, electronically or
                         in writing,
                 (v)     a statement that if a party does not attend in person or by counsel or an agent, the hearing
                         panel may proceed with the prehearing conference in the party’s absence, and
                 (vi)    a statement that any orders made by the hearing panel will be binding on the parties.




Series 8000 | Procedural Rules – Enforcement                                                                   Rule 8400
                                                                Investment Dealer and Partially Consolidated Rules

         (3)     If a hearing panel orders a prehearing conference, the National Hearing Officer must set a date
                 for the prehearing conference, if necessary, and serve a notice of prehearing conference on the
                 parties with a copy of the decision of the hearing panel.
         (4)     If a respondent has served and filed a response in accordance with subsection 8415(1), the initial
                 appearance provided in a notice of hearing must be followed immediately by an initial prehearing
                 conference, for which no notice of prehearing conference is required.
         (5)     If a response has been served and filed, the parties must serve and file a prehearing conference
                 form, in a form prescribed by the National Hearing Officer, at least five days before the date of
                 the initial appearance specified in the notice of hearing.
         (6)     At a prehearing conference, a hearing panel may consider any issue that may assist in a just and
                 expeditious resolution of the proceeding, including:
                 (i)     identification, simplification and clarification of the issues,
                 (ii)    disclosure of documents, including expert reports,
                 (iii)   facts or evidence on which the parties agree,
                 (iv)    admissibility of evidence, including evidence to be admitted on consent and identification
                         of objections,
                 (v)     scheduling of motions,
                 (vi)    procedural issues, including identifying and setting dates by which steps in the proceeding
                         are to be commenced or taken, the estimated duration of a hearing and the dates on which
                         the hearing will commence and be conducted,
                 (vii) settlement of any or all issues in the proceeding, and
                 (viii) any other procedural or substantive matters.
         (7)     A hearing panel at a prehearing conference may:
                 (i)     set a timetable for steps preceding a hearing and for the hearing,
                 (ii)    schedule further prehearing conferences, preliminary motions and the hearing of the
                         proceeding on its merits,
                 (iii)   amend an existing schedule or timetable,
                 (iv)    set the issues to be addressed at a further prehearing conference or in a motion,
                 (v)     order the parties to exchange or file by a specified date documents or submissions for
                         purposes of a further prehearing conference or a motion,
                 (vi)    order that the proceeding be case managed by the hearing panel or another hearing panel
                         to be selected by the National Hearing Officer, with or without the consent of the parties,
                 (vii) exercise the authority conferred by section 8208 to require a person to attend and give
                       evidence or produce documents at a hearing, and
                 (viii) with the consent of the parties, make an order resolving any matter, including matters
                        relating to:
                         (a)     facts or evidence agreed on,
                         (b)     disclosure of documents or evidence,
                         (c)     the resolution of any or all of the issues in the proceeding, and

Series 8000 | Procedural Rules – Enforcement                                                                  Rule 8400
                                                            Investment Dealer and Partially Consolidated Rules

                 (ix)    make any other procedural order that the hearing panel believes will further the just and
                         expeditious conduct of the proceeding.
         (8)     A hearing panel that case manages a proceeding must preside over all prehearing conferences
                 and preliminary motions in the proceeding, unless the hearing panel orders otherwise.
         (9)     An order, agreement or undertaking that is made or given at a prehearing conference must be
                 recorded in a prehearing memorandum that is:
                 (i)     prepared by or under the direction of the hearing panel taking into account the principles
                         in subsections 8416(12) and 8416(13),
                 (ii)    circulated to the parties for comment,
                 (iii)   approved and signed by the hearing panel, and
                 (iv)    distributed to the parties and any other person that the hearing panel directs.
         (10) A prehearing memorandum must be filed and provided to the hearing panel at subsequent
              hearings in the proceeding.
         (11) An order, agreement or undertaking recorded in a prehearing memorandum is binding on the
              parties, unless a hearing panel orders otherwise.
         (12) Unless recorded in a prehearing memorandum, all statements and written submissions made at a
              prehearing conference are without prejudice and must not be communicated to a hearing panel,
              except at a subsequent prehearing conference.
         (13) A prehearing conference must be held in the absence of the public, and subject to subsections
              8416(9) and 8416(10), prehearing documents, exhibits, submissions and transcripts must not be
              disclosed to the public.
         (14) A prehearing agreement to settle all of the issues in a proceeding is subject to approval by
              another hearing panel pursuant to section 8215.
8417. Disclosure
         (1)     As soon as is reasonably practicable after a response is served and filed, and if requested by the
                 respondent, Enforcement Staff must disclose to and make available for inspection by a respondent
                 all documents and things in the Corporation’s possession or control that are relevant to the
                 proceeding, including documents and things that are relevant to the respondent’s ability to make
                 full answer and defence.
         (2)     Enforcement Staff must provide copies to, in hard copy or electronic form, or permit a
                 respondent to make copies of all documents and things specified in subsection 8417(1) as soon as
                 is reasonably practicable after it makes disclosure and no later than 40 days before the
                 commencement of the hearing on the merits.
         (3)     As soon as is reasonably practicable after a response is served and filed, and no later than 40 days
                 before the commencement of the hearing on the merits, each party to a proceeding must serve
                 every other party with:
                 (i)     all documents that the party intends to produce or enter as evidence at the hearing on the
                         merits, and



Series 8000 | Procedural Rules – Enforcement                                                                 Rule 8400
                                                             Investment Dealer and Partially Consolidated Rules

                 (ii)    a list of items, other than documents, that the party intends to produce or enter as
                         evidence at the hearing on the merits.
         (4)     At any stage of a proceeding, a hearing panel may order a party to provide to another party any
                 document or other information that the hearing panel considers appropriate, within a time
                 period and on terms and conditions determined by the hearing panel.
         (5)     A party who does not disclose a document or thing in compliance with subsections 8417(3) and
                 8417(4) may not introduce in evidence or refer to the document or thing at a hearing on the
                 merits without leave of the hearing panel on terms and conditions the hearing panel
                 considers just.
8418. Witness lists and statements
         (1)     Subject to section 8417, as soon as reasonably practicable after a response is served and filed,
                 and no later than 30 days before the commencement of the hearing on the merits, Enforcement
                 Staff must serve:
                 (i)     a list of the witnesses Enforcement Staff intends to call to testify at the hearing, and
                 (ii)    in respect of each witness named on the list, a summary of the evidence the witness is
                         expected to give at the hearing, a witness statement signed by the witness or a transcript of
                         a recorded statement of the witness.
         (2)     Subject to section 8417, as soon as reasonably practicable after a response is served and filed,
                 and no later than 20 days before the commencement of the hearing on the merits, a respondent
                 must serve:
                 (i)     a list of the witnesses, not including the respondent, whom the respondent intends to call
                         to testify at the hearing, and
                 (ii)    in respect of each witness named on the list, a summary of the evidence the witness is
                         expected to give at the hearing, a witness statement signed by the witness or a transcript of
                         a recorded statement of the witness, unless the transcript was disclosed by Enforcement
                         Staff pursuant to section 8417 or subsection 8418(1).
         (3)     A summary of expected evidence, witness statement or transcript served in accordance with
                 subsection 8418(1) or 8418(2) must contain:
                 (i)     the substance of the evidence of the witness,
                 (ii)    a reference to any document the witness will refer to, and
                 (iii)   the name, address and telephone number of the witness or of a person through whom the
                         witness can be contacted.
         (4)     A party who does not include a person in a witness list or disclose the person’s expected evidence
                 in accordance with subsections 8418(1) through 8418(3) may not call the person as a witness at
                 the hearing without leave of the hearing panel on terms and conditions the hearing panel
                 considers just.
         (5)     A witness may not testify to matters not disclosed in accordance with subsection 8418(3) without
                 leave of the hearing panel on terms and conditions the hearing panel considers just.



Series 8000 | Procedural Rules – Enforcement                                                                        Rule 8400
                                                            Investment Dealer and Partially Consolidated Rules

8419. Expert witnesses
         (1)     A party who intends to call an expert witness at a hearing must, at least 45 days before the
                 commencement of the hearing, serve a written report signed by the expert.
         (2)     A party who intends to call an expert witness in response to an expert’s report served pursuant to
                 subsection 8419(1) must, at least 20 days before the commencement of the hearing, serve a
                 written report signed by the expert.
         (3)     A party who intends to call expert evidence to reply to a responding expert’s report served
                 pursuant to subsection 8419(2) must, at least 10 days before the commencement of the hearing,
                 serve a written report in reply signed by the expert.
         (4)     An expert’s report must contain:
                 (i)     the name, address and qualifications of the expert,
                 (ii)    the substance of the expert’s evidence, and
                 (iii)   a reference to any document the expert will refer to.
         (5)     A party who does not comply with subsection 8419(1), 8419(2) or 8419(4) may not call the expert
                 as a witness or introduce in evidence or refer to the expert’s report or opinion at a hearing,
                 without leave of the hearing panel on terms and conditions the hearing panel considers just.
         (6)     If the party who calls an expert witness has not complied with subsection 8419(3), the expert
                 witness may not testify to matters for which an expert’s report in reply was required, without
                 leave of the hearing panel on terms and conditions the hearing panel considers just.
8420. Deemed undertaking
         (1)     In this section, “information” means evidence and information obtained from a party that is
                 required to be disclosed or provided pursuant to sections 8416, 8417, 8418 and 8419 prior to a
                 hearing on the merits, including evidence and information disclosed or provided in a prehearing
                 conference, and any information obtained from such evidence or information.
         (2)     This section does not apply to information obtained otherwise than under section 8416, 8417,
                 8418 or 8419 or in a prehearing conference.
         (3)     A party and its counsel or agent are deemed to undertake not to disclose or use information for
                 any purposes other than those of the proceeding in which the information was obtained, without
                 the consent of the party who disclosed or provided the information or information on the basis of
                 which the information was obtained.
         (4)     Subsection 8420(3) does not prohibit use of information that is:
                 (i)     filed with the National Hearing Officer,
                 (ii)    given or referred to during a hearing, or
                 (iii)   obtained from information referred to in clauses 8420(4)(i) and 8420(4)(ii).
         (5)     Notwithstanding subsection 8420(3), information may be used to impeach the testimony of a
                 witness in another proceeding.
         (6)     A hearing panel may permit the use of information that is subject to this section for purposes
                 other than those of the proceeding in which it was disclosed or provided, if the hearing panel is


Series 8000 | Procedural Rules – Enforcement                                                                 Rule 8400
                                                             Investment Dealer and Partially Consolidated Rules

                 satisfied that the public interest outweighs any prejudice that would result to the party who
                 disclosed the information or the person from whom it was obtained by that party, subject to any
                 terms and conditions the hearing panel considers just.
8421. Order to attend and issue of summons
         (1)     At any stage of a proceeding, a party may request a hearing panel to exercise its authority under
                 section 8208 to require a person to attend and give evidence or produce documents at a hearing.
         (2)     If a hearing panel orders a person who is subject to the Corporation’s contractual jurisdiction to
                 attend and give evidence or produce documents, the National Hearing Officer must serve a
                 notice, in a prescribed form, by personal service in accordance with clause 8406(3)(i), 8406(3)(iv)
                 or 8406(3)(v), requiring the attendance of the person to give evidence or produce documents, as
                 ordered by the hearing panel.
         (3)     If a hearing panel orders an employee, partner, director or officer of a Regulated Person, who is
                 not an Approved Person, to attend at a hearing, the National Hearing Officer must serve a notice
                 on the person in accordance with subsection 8421(2) and on the Regulated Person requiring the
                 Regulated Person to direct the person to comply with the order.
         (4)     If a hearing panel orders a person who is not subject to the Corporation’s contractual jurisdiction
                 to attend and give evidence or produce documents in a District in which the hearing panel is
                 authorized by law to do so, the National Hearing Officer must serve a summons or subpoena in
                 accordance with the procedure prescribed by law for the issue of a summons or subpoena by a
                 court, regulatory tribunal or analogous decision maker in the District.
8422. Adjournments
         (1)     A party who decides to request an adjournment of a hearing on the merits must immediately so
                 advise the other parties and the National Hearing Officer in writing.
         (2)     If the other parties consent to the request for an adjournment, the requesting party may serve
                 and file a written request for the adjournment stating that it is made on consent, and a hearing
                 panel may:
                 (i)     refuse the request,
                 (ii)    reschedule the hearing without a hearing on the request, or
                 (iii)   require a hearing on the request.
         (3)     If the parties do not consent to a request for an adjournment, the requesting party must bring a
                 motion as soon as possible and the notice of motion must contain:
                 (i)     the reasons for the adjournment,
                 (ii)    the length of time requested for the adjournment, and
                 (iii)   if the motion is brought fewer than 40 days before the date of the hearing, a request for an
                         abridgement of the times specified in section 8413, if necessary.
         (4)     If a motion requesting an adjournment cannot be heard at least 20 days before the date for the
                 commencement of the hearing and the parties do not consent, the motion must be heard at the
                 commencement of the hearing and the requesting party must be prepared to proceed if the
                 motion is denied.

Series 8000 | Procedural Rules – Enforcement                                                                  Rule 8400
                                                             Investment Dealer and Partially Consolidated Rules

         (5)     A hearing panel may grant or deny an adjournment on any terms and conditions it considers just.
8423. Conduct of hearing on the merits
         (1)     At a hearing on the merits a respondent is entitled to be represented by counsel or an agent and
                 to make submissions.
         (2)     At a hearing on the merits, other than a written hearing, a respondent is entitled:
                 (i)     to attend and be heard in person,
                 (ii)    to call and examine witnesses and present documentary and other evidence, and
                 (iii)   to cross-examine witnesses as reasonably required for a full and fair disclosure of all
                         matters relevant to the issues in the proceeding.
         (3)     A hearing on the merits, other than a written hearing, must be conducted in the following order:
                 (i)     Enforcement Staff may make an opening address, which may be followed by an opening
                         address by the respondent,
                 (ii)    Enforcement Staff must present its evidence and examine its witnesses, who may be
                         cross-examined by the respondent,
                 (iii)   the respondent may make an opening address and must present its evidence and examine
                         its witnesses, who may be cross-examined by other parties,
                 (iv)    Enforcement Staff may present evidence in reply to any evidence presented for the first
                         time by the respondent and examine witnesses, who may be cross-examined by the
                         respondent,
                 (v)     if the hearing panel requests or permits, the parties may serve and file, by dates ordered by
                         the hearing panel, submissions in writing on the facts and legal argument with respect to
                         the contraventions alleged in the notice of hearing, which submissions must not be made
                         public prior to the commencement of the hearing of the submissions, and, if necessary, the
                         National Hearing Officer must set a date for the hearing of such submissions,
                 (vi)    Enforcement Staff may make closing submissions, followed by the respondent’s closing
                         submissions and Enforcement Staff’s reply to issues raised by the respondent,
                 (vii) unless the parties agree otherwise, after the hearing panel makes its decision on the merits
                       of the allegations in the notice of hearing, the National Hearing Officer must set a date for
                       the presentation of additional evidence, if any, and the hearing of submissions on sanctions
                       and costs, and
                 (viii) the hearing panel may request or permit the parties to serve and file written submissions
                        on sanctions and costs, which submissions must not be made public prior to the
                        commencement of the sanctions hearing.
         (4)     After cross-examination of a witness, the party who called the witness may further examine the
                 witness with respect to matters raised for the first time in cross-examination.
         (5)     Following examination and cross-examination of a witness, a hearing panel may ask questions of
                 the witness, subject to the right of the parties to ask further questions with respect to matters
                 raised by the hearing panel.


Series 8000 | Procedural Rules – Enforcement                                                                       Rule 8400
                                                            Investment Dealer and Partially Consolidated Rules

         (6)     If two or more respondents are separately represented, the hearing panel may direct the order of
                 presentation.
         (7)     A hearing panel may control the scope and manner of questioning of a witness to protect the
                 witness from undue harassment.
         (8)     A hearing panel may order a witness to be excluded from a hearing until the witness is called to
                 give evidence, unless the presence of the witness is necessary to instruct a party’s counsel or
                 agent, in which case the hearing panel may require the witness to be called to give evidence
                 before other witnesses are called.
         (9)     If a hearing panel orders the exclusion of a witness, evidence given during the witness’s absence
                 from the hearing must not be communicated to the witness until the witness has completed
                 giving evidence, except with leave of the hearing panel.
         (10) A hearing panel may permit a party to present the evidence of a witness or proof of a particular
              fact or document by affidavit, unless another party reasonably requires the attendance of the
              witness at the hearing for cross-examination.
         (11) If a hearing panel requests or permits the parties to make written submissions on sanctions and
              costs, unless the hearing panel orders otherwise:
                 (i)     the date set for the sanctions hearing must be at least 30 days after the date of the decision
                         on the merits,
                 (ii)    Enforcement Staff must serve and file submissions at least 14 days before the sanctions
                         hearing,
                 (iii)   the respondent must serve and file submissions at least seven days before the sanctions
                         hearing, and
                 (iv)    Enforcement Staff must serve and file any reply submissions at least three days before the
                         sanctions hearing.
         (12) If a respondent who has been served with a notice of hearing does not attend the hearing on the
              merits, the hearing panel:
                 (i)     may proceed with the hearing in the respondent’s absence and may accept as proven the
                         facts and contraventions alleged in the notice of hearing and statement of allegations, and
                 (ii)    if it finds that the respondent committed the alleged contraventions, may hear submissions
                         on sanctions from Enforcement Staff immediately, without a further hearing on sanctions
                         and costs, and may impose sanctions and costs pursuant to sections 8209 or 8210, as it
                         considers appropriate.
8424. Written hearings
         (1)     If a hearing is a written hearing, the party who serves a commencing notice must, with the motion
                 or other record required by the Rules of Procedure or within a time directed by a hearing panel,
                 serve and file the party’s written submissions containing, as applicable:
                 (i)     a statement of agreed facts,
                 (ii)    the party’s factual and legal submissions, and
                 (iii)   any material ordered by the hearing panel.


Series 8000 | Procedural Rules – Enforcement                                                                   Rule 8400
                                                            Investment Dealer and Partially Consolidated Rules

         (2)     A respondent or responding party may respond, within the time provided in subsection 8413(7) or
                 in a decision of a hearing panel, by serving and filing a responding motion record, if applicable,
                 and the party’s factual and legal submissions.
         (3)     A party may reply to a response served pursuant to subsection 8424(2), within the time provided
                 in subsection 8413(9) or in a decision of a hearing panel, by serving and filing a reply record, if
                 applicable, and the party’s factual and legal submissions.
         (4)     A hearing panel may:
                 (i)     require a party to serve and file additional information,
                 (ii)    on request of a party, order that a party present a witness to be examined or cross-
                         examined on any terms and conditions the hearing panel directs, and
                 (iii)   after considering the record, order that the hearing be continued as an oral hearing or
                         electronic hearing.
8425. Temporary orders
         (1)     Where a proceeding pursuant to section 8211 is commenced, Enforcement Staff must file a notice
                 of application and application record at least five days prior to the date of the hearing or a
                 shorter period permitted by a hearing panel.
         (2)     An application under subsection 8425(1) may be made with or without notice to the respondent.
         (3)     A notice of application must contain:
                 (i)     the date, time and location of the hearing,
                 (ii)    whether notice has been given to the respondent,
                 (iii)   a statement of the purpose of the proceeding,
                 (iv)    the sanctions requested by Enforcement Staff,
                 (v)     the grounds for the application, including a reference to any Corporation requirements or
                         applicable laws that the respondent is alleged to have contravened,
                 (vi)    a statement of the facts alleged that support the alleged contraventions and the need for a
                         temporary order,
                 (vii) a list of documentary and other evidence relied on,
                 (viii) whether it is proposed that the application be heard as an oral hearing, electronic hearing
                        or written hearing, and
                 (ix)    any other information that Enforcement Staff considers advisable.
         (4)     An application record must contain:
                 (i)     the notice of application, and
                 (ii)    copies of the evidence, including affidavit and other materials relied on.
         (5)     If an application under subsection 8425(1) is made with notice, Enforcement Staff must serve the
                 respondent with the application record before it is filed and the respondent may serve and file a
                 responding record at least two days prior to the date of the hearing.
         (6)     A responding record must contain:



Series 8000 | Procedural Rules – Enforcement                                                                    Rule 8400
                                                            Investment Dealer and Partially Consolidated Rules

                 (i)     the order requested by the respondent, including a statement of the reasons for the order
                         requested, and
                 (ii)    copies of any additional evidence, including affidavits and other materials relied on.
         (7)     A party to an application under subsection 8425(1) may serve, if notice is given, and file a
                 memorandum of fact and law prior to the hearing of the application.
         (8)     A hearing panel may, at any time, on any terms or conditions it considers appropriate, require
                 oral testimony to be adduced at the hearing on any matter in issue and allow cross-examination
                 on an affidavit.
         (9)     A hearing panel may:
                 (i)     grant the temporary order requested,
                 (ii)    dismiss or adjourn the application in whole or in part, with or without terms, and
                 (iii)   make another decision it considers appropriate.
         (10) If an application under subsection 8425(1) is made on notice, the decision and reasons of the
              hearing panel constitute the notice required by subsection 8211(3).
         (11) If an application under subsection 8425(1) is made without notice, a notice of a temporary order
              pursuant to subsection 8211(3) must contain:
                 (i)     a statement that a temporary order has been made with respect to the respondent,
                         describing the terms of the temporary order,
                 (ii)    the grounds on which the temporary order was requested and a reference to the notice of
                         application containing them, and
                 (iii)   a summary of subsection 8211(2) and the date, time and location of a hearing pursuant to
                         clause 8211(2)(i).
         (12) A notice of a temporary order under subsection 8425(11) must be accompanied by:
                 (i)     a copy of the decision or order and reasons of the hearing panel,
                 (ii)    a copy of the notice of application and application record filed by Enforcement Staff,
                 (iii)   a summary of any oral evidence received by the hearing panel or a transcript of the
                         hearing,
                 (iv)    copies of any documentary or other evidence received by the hearing panel that is not
                         contained in the application record, and
                 (v)     any written submissions presented to the hearing panel.
         (13) A hearing to extend a temporary order must follow the procedure in section 8413 for a motion.
8426. Protective orders
         (1)     Where a proceeding pursuant to section 8212 is commenced, Enforcement Staff must serve the
                 respondent with, and file, a notice of application and application record at least five days prior to
                 the date of the hearing or a shorter period permitted by a hearing panel.
         (2)     A notice of application must contain:
                 (i)     the date, time and location of the hearing,
                 (ii)    a statement of the purpose of the proceeding,

Series 8000 | Procedural Rules – Enforcement                                                                      Rule 8400
                                                               Investment Dealer and Partially Consolidated Rules

                 (iii)      the order requested by Enforcement Staff,
                 (iv)       the grounds for the application, including a reference to any Corporation requirements or
                            applicable laws that the respondent is alleged to have contravened,
                 (v)        a statement of the facts alleged that support the alleged contraventions, the need for a
                            protective order and the order sought,
                 (vi)       a list of documentary and other evidence relied on,
                 (vii) whether it is proposed that the application be heard as an oral hearing, electronic hearing
                       or written hearing, and
                 (viii) any other information that Enforcement Staff considers advisable.
         (3)     An application record must contain:
                 (i)        the notice of application, and
                 (ii)       copies of the evidence, including affidavits and other materials relied on.
         (4)     Enforcement Staff must serve the application record before it is filed and a respondent may serve
                 and file a responding record.
         (5)     A responding record must contain:
                 (i)        the order requested by the respondent, including a statement of the reasons for the order
                            requested, and
                 (ii)       copies of any additional evidence, including affidavits and other materials relied on.
         (6)     A party to an application under subsection 8426(1) may serve and file a memorandum of fact and
                 law prior to the hearing of the application.
         (7)     A hearing panel may, at any time, on any terms or conditions it considers appropriate, require
                 oral testimony to be adduced at the hearing on any matter in issue and allow cross-examination
                 on an affidavit.
         (8)     A hearing panel may:
                 (i)        grant the order requested,
                 (ii)       dismiss or adjourn the application in whole or in part, with or without terms, and
                 (iii)      make any other decision authorized by subsection 8212(4) that it considers appropriate.
8427. Review of protective orders
         (1)     A party who requests a review of a decision made under section 8212 must serve and file, within
                 30 days of the date of the decision, a notice of request for review and a review record.
         (2)     A notice of request for review must contain:
                    (i)         the date, time and location of the hearing of the request for review,
                    (ii)        the relief sought,
                    (iii)       the grounds for the relief sought, including reference to any Corporation requirements
                                or applicable laws,
                    (iv)        a list of evidence and other materials relied on, and
                    (v)         whether it is proposed that the request for review be heard as an oral hearing,
                                electronic hearing or written hearing.

Series 8000 | Procedural Rules – Enforcement                                                                         Rule 8400
                                                              Investment Dealer and Partially Consolidated Rules

         (3)     A review record must contain:
                    (i)        the notice of request for review, and
                    (ii)       copies of any additional evidence, including affidavits and other materials relied on.
         (4)     Enforcement Staff must file, at least seven days prior to the date of the review hearing, a record
                 that contains the record of the hearing under section 8212, the decision and reasons of the
                 hearing panel, a transcript of the hearing and copies of any documentary or other evidence
                 received by the hearing panel not otherwise contained in the record.
         (5)     A responding party may serve and file a reply no later than seven days prior to the date of the
                 review hearing.
         (6)     A reply must contain:
                 (i)       the order requested by the responding party and a statement of the reasons for the order
                           requested, and
                 (ii)      copies of any additional evidence, including affidavits and other material relied on.
         (7)     The parties may serve and file a memorandum of fact and law no later than two days prior to the
                 date of the review hearing.
         (8)     A review hearing must be conducted in the following order:
                 (i)       the requesting party may present evidence,
                 (ii)      the responding party may present evidence,
                 (iii)     the requesting party may make submissions,
                 (iv)      the responding party may make submissions, and
                 (v)       the requesting party may reply to the submissions of the responding party.
         (9)     A hearing panel may at any time, on any terms or conditions it considers appropriate, require oral
                 testimony to be adduced at the review hearing on any matter in issue and allow cross-
                 examination on an affidavit.
         (10) At any time prior to a review hearing, a requesting party may bring a motion for a stay of an order
              made under subsection 8212(4).
8428. Settlement hearings
         (1)     If a settlement agreement is made after a notice of hearing has been issued, a settlement hearing
                 must be commenced by a notice of motion.
         (2)     If a settlement agreement is made before a notice of hearing is issued, a settlement hearing must
                 be commenced by a notice of application.
         (3)     Enforcement Staff must serve the respondent with, and file, a commencing notice for a settlement
                 hearing and must file copies of the settlement agreement at least seven days prior to the date of
                 the settlement hearing, unless the hearing on the merits has commenced and the hearing panel
                 orders otherwise.
         (4)     A commencing notice for a settlement hearing must contain:
                 (i)       the date, time and location of the settlement hearing,
                 (ii)      the identity of the respondent,

Series 8000 | Procedural Rules – Enforcement                                                                       Rule 8400
                                                             Investment Dealer and Partially Consolidated Rules

                 (iii)   a statement of the purpose of the hearing,
                 (iv)    the general nature of the allegations addressed by the settlement agreement, and
                 (v)     whether it is proposed that the settlement hearing be an oral hearing, electronic hearing or
                         written hearing.
         (5)     A settlement agreement must not be open for inspection by the public unless it has been
                 accepted by a hearing panel.
         (6)     At a settlement hearing, facts that are not contained in the settlement agreement must not be
                 disclosed to the hearing panel without the consent of all parties, unless the respondent does not
                 appear, in which case Enforcement Staff may disclose additional relevant facts, if requested by
                 the hearing panel.
8429. Monitor
         (1)     A request for directions by Enforcement Staff or a Monitor must be made by bringing a motion in
                 accordance with section 8413.

PART C - REVIEW PROCEEDINGS
8430. Regulatory review hearings
         (1)     A party who requests a review of a regulatory decision must serve and file, within the time
                 specified in Corporation requirements relating to the regulatory decision and:
                 (i)     in the case of a decision made under section 9204, 9206 or 9207, at least 14 days, and
                 (ii)    in the case of a decision under Part B of Rule 4100, no more than the number of days
                         specified in Part B of Rule 4100, prior to the date of the hearing, a notice of request for
                         review and a review record.
         (2)     A notice of request for review must contain:
                 (i)     the date, time and location of the hearing of the request for review,
                 (ii)    the relief sought,
                 (iii)   the grounds for the relief sought, including reference to any Corporation requirements or
                         applicable laws,
                 (iv)    a list of evidence and other materials relied on, and
                 (v)     whether it is proposed that the request for review be heard as an oral hearing, electronic
                         hearing or written hearing.
         (3)     A review record must contain:
                 (i)     the notice of request for review,
                 (ii)    any notice of the regulatory decision received by the requesting party,
                 (iii)   the regulatory decision and any reasons for the regulatory decision,
                 (iv)    any materials that accompanied the notice of the regulatory decision or the regulatory
                         decision received by the requesting party,
                 (v)     copies of any additional evidence, including affidavits and other materials relied on.
         (4)     A responding party may serve and file a reply no later than seven days prior to the date of the
                 review hearing.
Series 8000 | Procedural Rules – Enforcement                                                                      Rule 8400
                                                            Investment Dealer and Partially Consolidated Rules

         (5)     A reply must contain:
                 (i)     the order requested by the responding party and a statement of the reasons for the order
                         requested, and
                 (ii)    copies of any additional evidence, including affidavits and other material relied on.
         (6)     The parties may serve and file a memorandum of fact and law no later than two days prior to the
                 date of the review hearing.
         (7)     A review hearing must be conducted in the following order:
                 (i)     the requesting party may present evidence,
                 (ii)    the responding party may present evidence,
                 (iii)   the requesting party may make submissions,
                 (iv)    the responding party may make submissions, and
                 (v)     the requesting party may reply to the submissions of the responding party.
         (8)     A hearing panel may at any time, on any terms or conditions it considers appropriate, require oral
                 testimony to be adduced at the review hearing on any matter in issue and allow cross-
                 examination on an affidavit.

PART D - SECURITIES REGULATORY AUTHORITY REVIEW
8431. Record for review
         (1)     A party who applies to a securities regulatory authority for review of a final decision of a hearing
                 panel may obtain a copy of the record of the proceeding in which the decision was made by
                 sending a request for the record, in prescribed form, to the National Hearing Officer.
         (2)     The National Hearing Officer must provide a copy of the record of the proceeding to the party
                 within a reasonable time after receipt of a request under subsection 8431(1), subject to payment
                 of any applicable costs or fees.
         (3)     Subject to subsection 8431(4), the record of a proceeding must include copies of:
                 (i)     the commencing notice in the proceeding,
                 (ii)    any interim orders made in the proceeding,
                 (iii)   any preconference memorandums,
                 (iv)    documentary and other evidence adduced in the proceeding, subject to any limitations
                         imposed under Corporation requirements by a hearing panel or by law,
                 (v)     any other documents in the proceeding requested by a party,
                 (vi)    a transcript of oral evidence given at the hearing on the merits, and
                 (vii) the decision and reasons of the hearing panel.
         (4)     The National Hearing Officer may omit any documents from the record of a proceeding, if:
                 (i)     the parties consent and the hearing panel agrees, or
                 (ii)    the hearing panel so directs.
         (5)     The National Hearing Officer may require the party who requests the record of a proceeding to
                 pay the costs of preparing a copy of the record and a reasonable fee for its preparation.


Series 8000 | Procedural Rules – Enforcement                                                                     Rule 8400
                                               Investment Dealer and Partially Consolidated Rules

8432. – 8999. Reserved.




Series 8000 | Procedural Rules – Enforcement                                              Rule 8400
                                                           Investment Dealer and Partially Consolidated Rules


SERIES 9000 | PROCEDURAL RULES – OTHER

RULE 9100 | COMPLIANCE EXAMINATIONS

9101. Introduction
         (1)     Rule 9100 sets out the powers of the Corporation to initiate and conduct compliance
                 examinations and request information and the rights and obligations of Regulated Persons with
                 respect to such examinations.
9102. Examinations
         (1)     An examination under Rule 9100 includes a request for information made by Corporation staff.
9103. Conducting examinations
         (1)     Corporation staff may examine the conduct, business and affairs of a Regulated Person with
                 respect to Corporation requirements, applicable laws, or trading or advising in respect of
                 securities, futures contracts or derivatives.
         (2)     Corporation staff may initiate an examination where they consider it advisable to do so.
9104. Examination powers
         (1)     In connection with an examination, Corporation staff may, by written or electronic request,
                 require a Regulated Person or an employee, partner, Director, officer or approved investor to:
                 (i)     provide a written report with respect to any matter,
                 (ii)    produce for inspection any records and documents in the person’s possession or control
                         that Corporation staff believe may be relevant to the examination, whether written,
                         electronically stored, or recorded,
                 (iii)   provide copies of any such records and documents in the manner and form, including
                         electronically and recorded, that Corporation staff requests, and
                 (iv)    answer questions with respect to any matter.
         (2)     In a request made under subsection 9104(1), Corporation staff may require production of
                 original documents and must provide a receipt for any original documents received.
         (3)     In connection with an examination, Corporation staff:
                 (i)     may, with or without prior notice, enter the business premises of any Regulated Person
                         during business hours,
                 (ii)    are entitled to free access to and to make and keep copies of all books of account,
                         securities, cash, documents, bank accounts, vouchers, correspondence and records of every
                         description that Corporation staff believe may be relevant to the examination, including by
                         taking an image of the computer hard drives of the Regulated Person, and
                 (iii)   may remove the original of any document or record obtained under clause 9104(3)(ii), and
                         where an original document or record is removed from the premises, Corporation staff
                         must provide a receipt for the removed document or record.
9105. Obligations of Regulated Persons and other persons

Series 9000 | Procedural Rules – Other                                                                       Rule 9100
                                                         Investment Dealer and Partially Consolidated Rules

         (1)     A person who receives a request made under section 9104 must comply with the request within
                 the time specified in it.
         (2)     A Regulated Person must cooperate with Corporation staff who are conducting an examination,
                 and a Regulated Person must require its employees, partners, directors and officers to cooperate
                 with Corporation staff conducting an examination and to comply with a request made under
                 section 9104.
         (3)     A person who is aware that Corporation staff is conducting an examination must not conceal or
                 destroy any record, document or thing that contains information that may be relevant to the
                 examination or ask or encourage any other person to do so.
9106. Use of information
         (1)     Corporation staff may refer any information obtained from an examination to Enforcement Staff,
                 other Corporation staff, or a securities, futures or derivatives regulatory authority.
         (2)     Corporation staff may take any other appropriate action based on information obtained from an
                 examination.
9107. – 9199. Reserved.




Series 9000 | Procedural Rules – Other                                                                    Rule 9100
                                                            Investment Dealer and Partially Consolidated Rules

RULE 9200 | APPROVALS AND REGULATORY SUPERVISION

9201. Introduction
         (1)     Rule 9200 sets out the authority of the Corporation to approve individuals employed by or
                 otherwise acting on behalf of Dealer Members, to grant exemptions from the Corporation’s
                 proficiency requirements, to impose terms and conditions on approvals and Membership in the
                 Corporation, to suspend and revoke approvals, and rights of review available to parties to such
                 decisions.
9202. Definitions
         (1)     The following terms have the meaning set out below when used in Rule 9200:
                    “application”                  An application for approval or an exemption under Rule
                                                   9200, but does not include a request for a review of a
                                                   decision on such an application under Rule 9300.
                    “decision”                     A determination made by the Corporation under Rule 9200.
                    “Registration Staff”           Registration staff of the Corporation.
                    “senior review officer”        A senior officer of the Corporation who has authority to
                                                   review a decision made by the Corporation under section
                                                   9206 in accordance with the procedures set out in section
                                                   9209

9203. Corporation Decisions
         (1)     Notice of a Corporation decision must be given to an applicant or other person who is its subject.
         (2)     The Corporation must not:
                 (i)     refuse an application,
                 (ii)    impose terms and conditions on an approval, or
                 (iii)   suspend or revoke an approval,
                 unless the applicant or Approved Person has been given an opportunity to be heard.
         (3)     Written reasons must be provided with notice of a decision that:
                 (i)     refuses an application,
                 (ii)    imposes terms and conditions on an approval, or
                 (iii)   suspends or revokes an approval.
         (4)     A decision is effective on the date on which notice of the decision is provided to the parties,
                 unless:
                 (i)     the decision provides otherwise, in which case the decision is effective on the date so
                         provided, or
                 (ii)    unless the decision is stayed under subsection 9209(4) or by a hearing panel.



Series 9000 | Procedural Rules – Other                                                                         Rule 9200
                                                               Investment Dealer and Partially Consolidated Rules

9204. Individual approval applications
         (1)     An individual may make an application to the Corporation for approval as a:
                 (i)     Supervisor,
                 (ii)    Director or Executive,
                 (iii)   Registered Representative, Investment Representative, Portfolio Manager and Associate
                         Portfolio Manager,
                 (iv)    Chief Financial Officer, Chief Compliance Officer, or Ultimate Designated Person, or
                 (v)     Trader.
         (2)     The Corporation must approve an application under subsection 9204(1), unless in its opinion:
                 (i)     the applicant:
                         (a)     does not comply with Corporation requirements,
                         (b)     is likely not to comply with Corporation requirements, or
                         (c)     does not comply with securities laws relating to or is not suitable for approval on the
                                 basis of training, experience, solvency or integrity, or
                 (ii)    the approval is otherwise not in the public interest.
         (3)     The Corporation may approve an application under subsection 9204(1), subject to any terms and
                 conditions it considers appropriate.
9205. Membership approval applications
         (1)     Corporation staff shall make a recommendation to the Board to:
                 (i)     approve an application for Dealer Member Membership in the Corporation made pursuant
                         to section 3.5 of General By-law No. 1,
                 (ii)    approve the application subject to such terms and conditions as may be considered just
                         and appropriate, or
                 (iii)   refuse the application if, in its opinion:
                         (a)     the applicant does not comply with one or more Corporation requirements,
                         (b)     one or more Corporation requirements will not be complied with by the applicant,
                         (c)     the applicant is not qualified for approval by reason of integrity, solvency, or
                                 experience, or
                         (d)     such approval is not in the public interest.
         (2)     Prior to consideration of an application for Dealer Member Membership in the Corporation by the
                 Board, the applicant shall be informed that it has an opportunity to be heard by the Board before
                 the Board decides on the application and shall be given a copy of Corporation staff’s
                 recommendation and informed in writing of the reasons for it.
         (3)     The Board shall have the power to:
                 (i)     approve an application for Dealer Member Membership in the Corporation made pursuant
                         to section 3.5 of General By-law No. 1,
                 (ii)    approve the application subject to such terms and conditions as may be considered just
                         and appropriate, or
                 (iii)   refuse the application if, in its opinion:

Series 9000 | Procedural Rules – Other                                                                              Rule 9200
                                                               Investment Dealer and Partially Consolidated Rules

                         (a)     the applicant does not comply with one or more Corporation requirements,
                         (b)     one or more Corporation requirements will not be complied with by the applicant,
                         (c)     the applicant is not qualified for approval by reason of integrity, solvency, or
                                 experience, or
                         (d)     such approval is not in the public interest.
         (4)     A decision of the Board under subsection 9205(3) is a final decision for which no further review or
                 appeal is provided under Corporation requirements.
9206. Exemption applications
         (1)     An individual or a Dealer Member, with respect to proficiency requirements applicable to its
                 Approved Persons, may apply to the Corporation for an exemption from the proficiency
                 requirements under Rule 2600, or for an extension of or exemption from a continuing education
                 requirement under Rule 2700.
         (2)     On an application under subsection 9206(1), the Corporation may grant an exemption or
                 extension in accordance with any standards in the relevant rule, subject to any terms and
                 conditions it considers appropriate.
9207. Continued approval
         (1)     The Corporation may, in its discretion, impose terms and conditions on the continued approval of
                 an Approved Person to ensure continuing compliance with Corporation requirements.
         (2)     The Corporation may suspend or revoke the approval of an Approved Person, if it appears to the
                 Corporation that:
                 (i)     the Approved Person is not suitable for approval by reason of integrity, solvency, training or
                         experience,
                 (ii)    the Approved Person has failed to comply with Corporation requirements, or
                 (iii)   the approval is otherwise not in the public interest.
9208. Terms and conditions on membership
         (1)     The Corporation may impose terms and conditions on a Dealer Member’s Membership in the
                 Corporation, where the Corporation considers it appropriate to ensure continuing compliance
                 with Corporation requirements.
         (2)     The Corporation must not impose terms and conditions on a Membership in the Corporation,
                 unless the Dealer Member has been given an opportunity to be heard.
         (3)     Notice of a decision imposing terms and conditions under subsection 9208(1) must be given to
                 the Dealer Member and must be accompanied by written reasons for the decision.
9209. Review Hearings
         (1)     Within 30 days after the release of a decision under section 9204, 9207 or 9208, an applicant,
                 Approved Person or Dealer Member, respectively, may request a review of the decision by a
                 hearing panel under Rule 9300.
         (2)     An applicant may, within 30 days after the release of a decision under section 9206, request a
                 review of the decision by a senior review officer.


Series 9000 | Procedural Rules – Other                                                                              Rule 9200
                                                            Investment Dealer and Partially Consolidated Rules

         (3)     Registration Staff may, within 30 days after the release of a decision, other than a decision made
                 by Registration Staff, request a review:
                 (i)     of a decision under section 9204 or 9207 by a decision under Rule 9300, or
                 (ii)    of a decision under section 9206 by a senior review officer.
         (4)     A request for review of a decision under section 9206 by Registration Staff operates as a stay of
                 the decision.
         (5)     If a review of a decision under section 9206 is requested, the National Hearing Officer must,
                 subject to subsection 9209(7), select a senior review officer to review the decision.
         (6)     A decision maker who has participated in a decision must not be selected to review the decision.
         (7)     On a review of a decision made under section 9206, the senior review officer may:
                 (i)     affirm the decision,
                 (ii)    quash the decision,
                 (iii)   vary or remove any terms and conditions imposed on the applicant, and
                 (iv)    make any decision that could have been made by the Corporation under section 9206.
         (8)     A decision of the senior review officer under subsection 9209(7) is a final decision for which no
                 further review or appeal is provided under Corporation requirements.
9210. Review by a securities regulatory authority
         (1)     A party may apply to the securities regulatory authority in the applicable District for a review of a
                 final decision of a senior review officer under Rule 9200.
         (2)     A person who is entitled to request a review by a senior review officer under section 9209 of a
                 decision made under section 9206 may not apply to a securities regulatory authority for review of
                 that decision, unless the person has requested a review by a senior review officer and the senior
                 review officer has made a final decision.
         (3)     For purposes of subsection 9210(1), Corporation staff is directly affected by a decision in a
                 proceeding in which Corporation staff is a party.
9211. – 9299. Reserved.




Series 9000 | Procedural Rules – Other                                                                           Rule 9200
                                                             Investment Dealer and Partially Consolidated Rules

RULE 9300 | REGULATORY REVIEW PROCEEDINGS

9301. Introduction
         (1)     Rule 9300 sets out the authority of hearing panels to review a decision under Rule 9200 or an
                 early warning level 2 prohibition under Part B of Rule 4100.
9302. Definitions
         (1)     The following terms have the meaning set out below when used in Rule 9300:
                   “application”                   An application for approval under section 9204.
                   “approval order”                An order made under section 9207.
                   “compliance order”              An order made under section 9208.
                   “decision”                      A determination made by the Corporation or a hearing
                                                   panel that makes a decision in a review proceeding under
                                                   Rule 9300.
                   “early warning review           An order made under Part B of Rule 4100.
                   order”

9303. Hearings and decisions
         (1)     Section 8203 applies to a proceeding under Rule 9300, with modifications required by the context
                 of this Rule 9300.
         (2)     A decision of a hearing panel is effective on the date the decision is dated by the National Hearing
                 Officer, unless the decision provides otherwise, in which case the decision is effective on the date
                 so provided.
9304. Review proceedings
         (1)     A request for review of a decision made on an application, an approval order, a compliance order
                 or an early warning review order must be heard by a hearing panel in accordance with the Rules
                 of Procedure.
         (2)     After a hearing under this section, a hearing panel may:
                 (i)     affirm the decision under review,
                 (ii)    quash the decision,
                 (iii)   vary or remove any terms and conditions imposed by the decision,
                 (iv)    prohibit, as applicable, a further application for approval under section 9204 by the
                         applicant for a period of time it considers appropriate, or
                 (v)     make any decision authorized by Corporation requirements under which the decision
                         was made.
9305. Review by a securities regulatory authority
         (1)     A party may apply to the securities regulatory authority in the applicable District for a review of a
                 final decision of a hearing panel under Rule 9300.

Series 9000 | Procedural Rules – Other                                                                           Rule 9300
                                                           Investment Dealer and Partially Consolidated Rules

         (2)     A person who is entitled to request a review of a decision under section 9304 may not apply to a
                 securities regulatory authority for review of the decision, unless the person has requested a
                 review by a hearing panel and the hearing panel has made a final decision.
         (3)     For purposes of subsection 9305(1), Corporation staff is directly affected by a decision in a
                 proceeding in which Corporation staff is a party.
9306. – 9399. Reserved.




Series 9000 | Procedural Rules – Other                                                                           Rule 9300
                                                            Investment Dealer and Partially Consolidated Rules

RULE 9400 | PROCEDURES FOR OPPORTUNITIES TO BE HEARD BEFORE DECISIONS ON APPROVAL
            AND REGULATORY COMPLIANCE MATTERS

9401. Introduction
         (1)     These procedures apply where Corporation requirements require an opportunity to be heard
                 before:
                 (i)     Corporation staff,
                 (ii)    a senior decision officer who has the authority to make a decision concerning an individual
                         or a Dealer Member, or
                 (iii)   the Board concerning an application for Dealer Member Membership in the Corporation.
         (2)     These procedures will be followed where, under statutory authority that has been delegated to
                 the Corporation, the Corporation makes a registration decision for which an opportunity to be
                 heard is required under securities laws.
         (3)     Rule 9400 is divided into the following parts:
                 Part A - Opportunities to be heard by a senior decision officer
                            [sections 9403 through 9410]
                 Part B - Opportunities to be heard by the Board
                            [sections 9411 through 9417]
9402. Definitions
         (1)     The following terms have the meaning set out below when used in Rule 9400:
                   “decision maker”               Corporation staff with authority to make a decision in a
                                                  hearing under Rule 9200.
                   “Registration Staff”           Refers to registration employees of the Corporation and
                                                  employees of Corporation who conduct compliance
                                                  examinations under Rule 9100.
                   “senior decision officer”      A senior officer of the Corporation who has authority to
                                                  make a decision to impose terms and conditions on a Dealer
                                                  Member’s Membership in the Corporation under section
                                                  9208

PART A - OPPORTUNITIES TO BE HEARD BY A SENIOR DECISION OFFICER
9403. Opportunities to be heard by a senior decision officer
         (1)     The procedures in sections 9404 through 9410 apply where an applicant has requested an
                 opportunity to be heard by a senior decision officer pursuant to subsection 9208(2) or by the
                 Corporation pursuant to subsection 9203(2).
         (2)     These procedures are intended to ensure that opportunities to be heard by a decision maker are
                 handled in a way that ensures a fair hearing, without being unnecessarily formal.

Series 9000 | Procedural Rules – Other                                                                        Rule 9400
                                                            Investment Dealer and Partially Consolidated Rules

9404. Counsel
         (1)     A party to a proceeding under Rule 9400 may be represented by counsel or an agent.
         (2)     If an applicant, Approved Person or Dealer Member is represented by counsel or an agent,
                 Registration Staff will communicate with the applicant, Approved Person or Dealer Member
                 through counsel or the agent.
9405. Corporation Staff Notice
         (1)     If Registration Staff recommends refusing to grant, revoking, or suspending a Corporation
                 approval or that terms and conditions be imposed on an approval or Membership, Registration
                 Staff must send a letter to the applicant, Approved Person or Dealer Member giving notice of
                 Registration Staff’s recommendation and brief reasons for it.
9406. Response of applicant, Approved Person or Dealer Member
         (1)     In section 9406 a “response” means the applicant, Approved Person or Dealer Member must
                 inform Registration Staff in writing if an applicant, Approved Person or Dealer Member wishes to
                 be heard before a decision is made on Registration Staff’s recommendation.
         (2)     A response must be delivered within 10 business days after receipt of Registration Staff’s letter,
                 or within such shorter period of time as set out in such letter.
         (3)     If a response is not delivered within the time set out in Registration Staff’s letter, Registration
                 Staff will send its recommendation to the decision maker for consideration.
9407. Choice of written submissions or appearance
         (1)     Unless otherwise decided by a decision maker, an opportunity to be heard will be conducted as
                 an exchange of written submissions. However, an applicant, Approved Person, Dealer Member or
                 Registration Staff may request that the opportunity to be heard be conducted as an appearance:
                 (i)     in the presence of a decision maker,
                 (ii)    by telephone conference, or
                 (iii)   by other interactive electronic means acceptable to both parties.
         (2)     A request that an opportunity to be heard be conducted as an appearance must be made to the
                 decision maker in writing, with a brief statement of the reasons for making the request, and the
                 other party will be given an opportunity to object to the request before the decision maker
                 decides whether to grant a request for an appearance.
         (3)     A decision maker may also decide on its own initiative that the opportunity to be heard will be
                 conducted as an appearance, in which case the decision maker must promptly inform the parties
                 of its decision.
9408. Exchange of written submissions
         (1)     This section describes the process to be followed if the opportunity to be heard is conducted by
                 exchange of written submissions.
         (2)     Registration Staff must provide the applicant, Approved Person or Dealer Member with a written
                 submission setting out the facts and law supporting Registration Staff’s recommendation.
                 Registration Staff’s submission must be delivered to the applicant, Approved Person or Dealer


Series 9000 | Procedural Rules – Other                                                                          Rule 9400
                                                           Investment Dealer and Partially Consolidated Rules

                 Member within 10 business days after Registration Staff receives the applicant’s, Approved
                 Person’s or Dealer Member’s response (as defined in section 9406).
         (3)     An applicant, Approved Person or Dealer Member must then provide Registration Staff with a
                 written submission responding to Registration Staff’s submission, to be delivered within 10
                 business days after the applicant, Approved Person, or Dealer Member receives Registration
                 Staff’s submission.
         (4)     Subject to agreement of the parties or a decision of the decision maker, there will only be one
                 exchange of written submissions so that the decision maker may render a decision without
                 unnecessary delay; however, where the parties agree to make further submissions or either of
                 them requests that the decision maker allow further submissions, such agreement or request
                 must be made within five business days after delivery of the applicant’s, Approved Person’s or
                 Dealer Member’s submission under subsection 9408(3).
         (5)     Unless an agreement or request is made under subsection 9408(4), Registration Staff’s and the
                 applicant’s, Approved Person’s or Dealer Member’s respective submission will be delivered by
                 Registration Staff to the decision maker within five business days after the applicant’s, Approved
                 Person’s or Dealer Member’s submission is delivered.
         (6)     If an agreement or request is made under subsection 9408(4), the submissions of all parties will
                 be delivered by Registration Staff to the decision maker when all submissions have been
                 delivered or the time for their delivery has elapsed.
9409. Appearance before a decision maker
         (1)     This section describes the process to be followed if the opportunity to be heard is conducted as
                 an appearance.
         (2)     An appearance before a decision maker will generally be an informal proceeding, and the Rules of
                 Procedure do not apply.
         (3)     At an appearance:
                 (i)     the decision maker may ask any question and admit any evidence it thinks fit,
                 (ii)    witnesses may be called, examined and cross-examined with the consent of the decision
                         maker, and
                 (iii)   the applicant, Approved Person or Dealer Member and any witnesses may be required to
                         give evidence under oath or affirmation.
9410. Decisions
         (1)     Where an applicant, Approved Person or Dealer Member requests that an opportunity to be
                 heard be conducted by exchange of written submissions, but fails to deliver submissions within
                 the required time, the decision maker may make its decision on Registration Staff’s
                 recommendation and submissions without further notice or delay.

PART B - OPPORTUNITIES TO BE HEARD BY THE BOARD
9411. Opportunities to be heard by the Board




Series 9000 | Procedural Rules – Other                                                                       Rule 9400
                                                           Investment Dealer and Partially Consolidated Rules

         (1)     The procedures in sections 9412 through 9417 apply where an applicant has requested an
                 opportunity to be heard by the Board in relation to an application for Dealer Member
                 Membership in the Corporation as set out in section 9205.
         (2)     These procedures are intended to ensure that opportunities to be heard by the Board are
                 handled in a way that ensures a fair hearing, without being unnecessarily formal.
9412. Corporation Staff Notice
         (1)     If Corporation staff recommends that the Board refuse to grant Membership in the Corporation,
                 or that terms and conditions be imposed on Membership in the Corporation, Corporation staff
                 must send a letter to the applicant giving notice of Corporation staff’s recommendation and brief
                 reasons for it.
9413. Response of applicant, Approved Person or Dealer Member
         (1)     In section 9413 a “response” means the applicant must inform Corporation staff in writing if an
                 applicant wishes to be heard before a decision is made on Corporation staff’s recommendation.
         (2)     A response must be delivered within 10 business days after receipt of Corporation staff’s letter, or
                 within such shorter period of time as set out in such letter.
         (3)     If a response is not delivered within the time set out in Corporation staff’s letter, Corporation staff
                 will send its recommendation to the Board for consideration.
9414. Choice of written submissions or appearance
         (1)     An opportunity to be heard will be conducted as an exchange of written submissions, unless an
                 applicant or Corporation staff requests that the opportunity to be heard be conducted as an
                 appearance:
                 (i)     in the presence of the Board,
                 (ii)    by telephone conference, or
                 (iii)   by other interactive electronic means acceptable to both parties.
         (2)     A request that an opportunity to be heard be conducted as an appearance must be made to the
                 Board in writing, with a brief statement of the reasons for making the request, by delivering a
                 copy of the request to the Corporation. The other party will be given an opportunity to object to
                 the request before the Board decides whether to grant a request for an appearance.
         (3)     The Board may also decide on its own initiative that the opportunity to be heard will be
                 conducted as an appearance, in which case the Board must promptly inform the parties of its
                 decision.
9415. Exchange of written submissions
         (1)     This section describes the process to be followed if the opportunity to be heard is conducted by
                 exchange of written submissions.
         (2)     Corporation staff must provide the applicant with a written submission setting out the facts and
                 law supporting Corporation staff’s recommendation, which submission must be delivered to the
                 applicant within 10 business days after Corporation staff receives the applicant’s response (as
                 defined in section 9413).


Series 9000 | Procedural Rules – Other                                                                          Rule 9400
                                                           Investment Dealer and Partially Consolidated Rules

         (3)     An applicant must then provide Corporation staff with a written submission responding to staff’s
                 submission, to be delivered within 10 business days after the applicant receives Corporation
                 staff’s submission.
         (4)     Subject to agreement of the parties or a decision of the Board:
                 (i)     there will only be one exchange of written submissions so that the Board may render a
                         decision without unnecessary delay, and
                 (ii)    where the parties agree to make further submissions or either of them requests that the
                         Board allow further submissions, such agreement or request must be made within five
                         business days after delivery of the applicant’s submission under subsection 9415(3).
         (5)     Unless an agreement or request is made under subsection 9415(4), Corporation staff’s and the
                 applicant’s respective submission will be provided to the Board within five business days after the
                 applicant’s submission is delivered.
         (6)     If an agreement or request is made under subsection 9415(4), the submissions of all parties will
                 be provided to the Board when all submissions have been delivered or the time for their delivery
                 has elapsed.
9416. Appearance before the Board
         (1)     This section describes the process to be followed if the opportunity to be heard is conducted as
                 an appearance.
         (2)     An appearance before the Board will generally be an informal proceeding, and the Rules of
                 Procedure do not apply.
         (3)     At an appearance:
                 (i)     the Board may ask any question and admit any evidence it thinks fit,
                 (ii)    witnesses may be called, examined and cross-examined with the consent of the Board, and
                 (iii)   the applicant and any witnesses may be required to give evidence under oath or
                         affirmation.
9417. Decisions
         (1)     Where an applicant requests that an opportunity to be heard be conducted by exchange of
                 written submissions, but fails to deliver submissions within the required time, the Board may
                 make its decision on Corporation staff’s recommendation and submissions without further notice
                 or delay.
9418. – 9499. Reserved.




Series 9000 | Procedural Rules – Other                                                                      Rule 9400
                                                           Investment Dealer and Partially Consolidated Rules

RULE 9500 | ALTERNATIVE DISPUTE RESOLUTION

9501. Introduction
         (1)     Rule 9500 sets out the requirements relating to a Dealer Member’s obligation to participate in
                 arbitration programs and ombudsman services approved by the Corporation.
9502. Participation by a Dealer Member in arbitration
         (1)     The Board may approve, with terms and conditions, one or more arbitration programs or
                 organizations for Dealer Members or any class of Dealer Members.
         (2)     A Dealer Member must participate in or become a member of an arbitration program or
                 organization approved by the Board.
         (3)     The participation of a Dealer Member in, or any decision made under, an arbitration program will
                 not affect the Corporation’s authority, or prevent it from exercising that authority under
                 Corporation requirements.
         (4)     If a client requests arbitration, the Dealer Member involved must submit to binding arbitration in
                 any dispute between the Dealer Member and the client.
          (5)      The Dealer Member must comply with the arbitration program’s requirements and decisions.
9503. Participation by a Dealer Member in an ombudsman service
         (1)     A Dealer Member must participate in an ombudsman service approved by the Board.
          (2)      The participation of a Dealer Member in, or any recommendations made by, an ombudsman
                   service, will not affect the authority of the Corporation or prevent it from exercising that
                   authority under Corporation requirements.
         (3)     On a client's request, any dispute between a Dealer Member and the client must be submitted to
                 the approved ombudsman service.
          (4)      The eligibility of a dispute for review is made by the ombudsman service based on its terms of
                   reference.
         (5)     A Dealer Member must comply with the ombudsman service’s requirements.
         (6)     The ombudsman's recommendations are non-binding on each participant in the service.
9504. Dealer Members must provide information to ombudsman service
         (1)     The ombudsman service may ask a Dealer Member, or an Approved Person, or other person
                 subject to the Corporation’s authority for information or records relating to a review or
                 investigation.
         (2)     The person in subsection 9504(1) must submit the information requested in the form and
                 manner, including electronic, as prescribed by the ombudsman service.
         (3)     The ombudsman may not provide the Corporation with any information or records of its service
                 received relating to a review or investigation, except information relating to a Corporation
                 investigation or hearing allegation that:
                 (i)     the Dealer Member provided information to the ombudsman service it knew was false and
                         intended to mislead the ombudsman, or

Series 9000 | Procedural Rules – Other                                                                      Rule 9500
                                                          Investment Dealer and Partially Consolidated Rules

                 (ii)    the Dealer Member failed to provide information as required by section 9504.
9505. –9999. Reserved.




Series 9000 | Procedural Rules – Other                                                                  Rule 9500
